Regulation of Investment Advisers   by the  U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 

March 2013 

Staff of the Investment Adviser Regulation Office 
Division of Investment Management 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
1   
Regulation of Investment Advisers by the 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission*  I. 
Introduction
Money managers, investment consultants, and financial planners are regulated in the 
United States as “investment advisers” under the U.S. Investment Advisers Act of 1940 
(“Advisers Act” or “Act”) or similar state statutes.  This outline describes the regulation 
of investment advisers by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). 
The Advisers Act is the last in a series of federal statutes intended to eliminate abuses in 
the securities industry that Congress believed contributed to the stock market crash of 
1929 and the depression of the 1930s.  The Act is based on a congressionally-mandated 
study of investment companies, including consideration of investment counsel and 
investment advisory services, carried out by the SEC during the 1930s.1  The SEC’s 
report traced the history and growth of investment advisers and reflected the position 
that investment advisers could not properly perform their function unless all conflicts of
report traced the history and growth of investment advisers and reflected the position 
that investment advisers could not properly perform their function unless all conflicts of 
interest between them and their clients were removed.  The report stressed that a 
significant problem in the industry was the existence, either consciously or, more likely, 
unconsciously, of a prejudice by advisers in favor of their own financial interests. 
The SEC’s report culminated in the introduction of a bill that, with some changes, 
became the Advisers Act.  The Act, as adopted, reflects congressional recognition of the 
delicate fiduciary nature of the advisory relationship, as well as Congress’ desire to 
eliminate, or at least expose, all conflicts of interest that might cause advisers, either 
consciously or unconsciously, to render advice that is not disinterested.2  
The outline that follows is divided into five sections, each of which addresses a
consciously or unconsciously, to render advice that is not disinterested.2  
The outline that follows is divided into five sections, each of which addresses a 
different question:  Who is an “investment adviser?”  Which investment advisers must 
register with the SEC?  Who must register under the Act?  How does an investment 
adviser register under the Act?  What are the requirements applicable to an investment 
adviser registered under the Act?
* 
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, as a matter of policy, disclaims responsibility for any 
private publication or statement by any of its employees.  The views expressed in this outline are those 
of the staff of the Investment Adviser Regulation Office, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission or others on the staff of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission.  The Investment Adviser Regulation Office would like to thank Robert E. Plaze, the 
original author of this outline, for his substantial contribution. 
1  
See Investment Trusts and Investment Companies, Report of the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
Pursuant to Section 30 of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, on Investment Counsel, 
Investment Management, Investment Supervisory and Investment Advisory Services, H.R. Doc. No. 
477, 76th Cong., 2d Sess. (1939). 
2 
SEC v. Capital Gains Research Bureau, Inc., 375 U.S. 180, 189, 191-192 (1963).
2  II. 
Who is an Investment Adviser? 
A. 
Definition of Investment Adviser   
Section 202(a)(11) of the Act defines an investment adviser as any person or firm 
that:  
 
for compensation;  
 
is engaged in the business of;  
 
providing advice to others or issuing reports or analyses regarding securities. 
A person must satisfy all three elements to fall within the definition of 
“investment adviser,” which the SEC staff has addressed in an extensive 
interpretive release explaining how the Act applies to financial planners, pension 
consultants and other persons who, as a part of some other financially related 
services, provide investment advice.3  Published in 1987, Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 1092 represents the views of the Division of Investment 
Management, which is primarily responsible for administering the Act. 
1. 
Compensation.  The term “compensation” has been broadly construed.  
Generally, the receipt of any economic benefit, whether in the form of an
1. 
Compensation.  The term “compensation” has been broadly construed.  
Generally, the receipt of any economic benefit, whether in the form of an 
advisory fee, some other fee relating to the total services rendered, a 
commission, or some combination, satisfies this element.4  The person 
receiving the advice or another person may pay the compensation. 
2. 
Engaged in the Business.  A person must be engaged in the business of 
providing advice.  This does not have to be the sole or even the primary 
activity of the person.  Factors used to evaluate whether a person is engaged 
are:  (i) whether the person holds himself out as an investment adviser; (ii) 
whether the person receives compensation that represents a clearly definable 
charge for providing investment advice; and (iii) the frequency and 
specificity of the investment advice provided.5  Generally, a person 
providing advice about specific securities will be “engaged in the business”
specificity of the investment advice provided.5  Generally, a person 
providing advice about specific securities will be “engaged in the business” 
unless specific advice is rendered only on a rare or isolated occasion.6
3  
Applicability of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 to Financial Planners, Pension Consultants, and 
Other Persons Who Provide Others with Investment Advice as a Component of Other Financial 
Services, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1092 (Oct. 8, 1987) (“Release 1092”). 
4 
Id.; see also Kenisa Oil Company, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (May 6, 1982); SEC v. Fife,  311 F. 3d 
1 (1st Cir. 2002) (a person provides advice “for compensation” if it understands that successful 
investment will yield it a commission);  In the Matter of Alexander V. Stein, Investment Advisers Act 
Release. No. 1497 (June 8, 1995) (a person receives “compensation” if it fraudulently converts client 
funds to its own use).  
5 
Zinn v. Parish, 644 F.2d 360 (7th Cir. 1981); Release 1092, supra note 3.  
6 
For instance, the SEC staff would not view an employer providing advice to an employee in connection 
with an employer-sponsored employee benefit program to be in the business of providing advice, see
with an employer-sponsored employee benefit program to be in the business of providing advice, see 
Letter to Olena Berg, Assistant Secretary, Department of Labor, from Jack W. Murphy, Chief Counsel, 
Division of Investment Management, SEC (Feb. 22, 1996).  See also Zinn, supra note 5 at 364 
(“isolated transactions with a client as an incident to the main purpose of his management contract to 
negotiate football contracts do not constitute engaging in the business of advising others on investment 
securities.”).
3  3. 
Advising Others about Securities   
a. 
Advice about Securities.  A person clearly meets the third element of 
the statutory test if he provides advice to others about specific 
securities, such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, limited partnerships, 
and commodity pools.  The SEC staff has stated that advice about real 
estate, coins, precious metals, or commodities is not advice about 
securities.7  The more difficult questions arise with less specific 
advice, or advice that is only indirectly about securities.  The SEC staff 
has stated in this regard: 
(i) 
advice about market trends is advice about securities;8 
(ii) 
advice about the selection and retention of other advisers is 
advice about securities;9 
(iii) advice about the advantages of investing in securities versus 
other types of investments (e.g., coins or real estate) is advice 
about securities;10 
(iv) providing a selective list of securities is advice about securities
other types of investments (e.g., coins or real estate) is advice 
about securities;10 
(iv) providing a selective list of securities is advice about securities 
even if no advice is provided as to any one security;11 and 
(v) 
asset allocation advice is advice about securities.12 
b. 
Advising Others.  Questions about whether a person advises “others” 
usually arise when a client is not a natural person.  The SEC staff 
generally looks to the substance of the arrangement rather than its 
form: 
(i) 
A general partner of a limited partnership that provides advice 
with respect to the investments of partnership assets is advising 
others (the limited partners) even where the general partner may 
have legal title to these assets.13
7  
Robert R. Champion, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Sept. 22, 1986). 
8 
Dow Theory Forecasts, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 2, 1978).  Thus, market-timing advice is 
advice about securities.  See Maratta Advisory, Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (July 16, 1981). 
9  
Release 1092, supra note 3; FPC Securities Corp., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 1, 1974).  See 
also SEC v. Bolla, 401 F.Supp. 43 (D.D.C. 2005), aff’d. in relevant  part, SEC v. Washington 
Investment Network, 475 F.3d 392 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (person selecting investment advisers for clients 
meets the Advisers Act’s definition of  “investment adviser”). 
10 
Release 1092, supra note 3. 
11 
RDM Infodustries, Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Mar. 25, 1996).  The SEC staff takes the position 
that providing information about securities in a report does not constitute providing advice about the 
securities if:  (i) the information is readily available to the public in its raw state; (ii) the categories of
securities if:  (i) the information is readily available to the public in its raw state; (ii) the categories of 
information presented are not highly selective; and (iii) the information is not organized or presented in 
a manner that suggests the purchase, holding, or sale of any security.  See id. 
12  
Maratta Advisory, Inc., supra, note 8.  See also SEC v. Bolla, supra, note 9. 
13 
Abrahamson v. Fleschner, 566 F.2d 862, 870 (2d Cir. 1977), cert. denied, 436 U.S. 913 (1978); SEC v. 
Haligiannis, 470 F. Supp. 2d 373, 383 (S.D.N.Y. 2007).
4  (ii) 
A wholly-owned corporate subsidiary exclusively advising the 
parent or another wholly owned corporate subsidiary would not 
generally be considered advising “others.”14 
c. 
Investment Banking.  The SEC staff does not believe that the Act 
applies to persons whose activities are limited to advising issuers 
concerning the structuring of their securities offerings (although such 
advice may technically be about securities).15 
d. 
Non-U.S. Clients.  The Act is silent regarding whether the clients must 
be U.S. persons.  The SEC takes the position that a U.S. person 
providing advice exclusively to non-U.S. persons would still be subject 
to the Act.16   
B. 
Exclusions from Definition   
There are several exclusions from the investment adviser definition available to 
persons who presumably (or at least arguably) satisfy all three elements of the 
definition.  A person eligible for one of the exclusions is not subject to any 
provisions of the Act.   
1.
persons who presumably (or at least arguably) satisfy all three elements of the 
definition.  A person eligible for one of the exclusions is not subject to any 
provisions of the Act.   
1. 
Banks and Bank Holding Companies.  This exclusion is generally limited to 
U.S. banks and bank holding companies.17  The SEC staff has stated that the 
exclusion is unavailable to non-U.S. banks,18 credit unions, and investment 
adviser subsidiaries of banks or bank holding companies.19  
2. 
Lawyers, Accountants, Engineers, and Teachers.  The professional exclusion 
is available only to those professionals listed, and only if the advice given is 
incidental to the practice of their profession.  Factors considered by staff to 
evaluate whether advice is incidental to a profession are: (i) whether the 
professional holds himself out as an investment adviser; (ii) whether the 
advice is reasonably related to the professional services provided; and (iii)
professional holds himself out as an investment adviser; (ii) whether the 
advice is reasonably related to the professional services provided; and (iii) 
whether the charge for advisory services is based on the same factors that
14  
See Zenkyoren Asset Management of America Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (June 30, 2011).   
15 
See, e.g., The Applicability of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 to Financial Advisors to Municipal 
Bond Issuers, Division of Investment Management, SEC Staff Legal Bulletin No. 11 (Sept. 19, 2000), 
available at http://www.sec.gov/interps/legal.shtml.  
16  
See Release 3221, infra note 46, at n.76. 
17 
The term “bank” is defined in section 202(a)(2) of the Act.  In 2001, the Act’s definition of 
“investment adviser” was amended so that banks and bank holding companies are not eligible for this 
exclusion to the extent that they serve or act as an investment adviser to a registered investment  
company.  However, if, in the case of a bank, such services or actions are performed through a 
separately identifiable department or division, the department or division, and not the bank itself, is
separately identifiable department or division, the department or division, and not the bank itself, is 
deemed to be the investment adviser.  The term “separately identifiable department or division” is 
defined in section 202(a)(26). 
18 
Letter to Rep. William J. Hughes from Stanley B. Judd, Deputy Chief Counsel, Division of Investment 
Management, SEC (June 4, 1980).  
19 
First Commerce Investors, Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Jan. 31, 1991); Southwest Corporate 
Federal Credit Union, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (May 31, 1983).
5  determine the professional’s usual charge.20 
3. 
Brokers and Dealers.  A broker or dealer that is registered with the SEC 
under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange Act”) is 
excluded from the Act if the advice given is: (i) solely incidental to the 
conduct of its business as broker or dealer, and (ii) it does not receive any 
“special compensation” for providing investment advice. 
a. 
Solely Incidental.  The SEC has stated that investment advice is “solely 
incidental” to brokerage services when the advisory services rendered 
are “in connection with and reasonably related to the brokerage 
services provided.”21  If advice is not “solely incidental,” a broker-
dealer is subject to the Advisers Act regardless of the form of 
compensation it receives.   
b. 
Special Compensation. Generally, to avoid receiving “special 
compensation,” a broker or dealer relying on this exclusion must
compensation it receives.   
b. 
Special Compensation. Generally, to avoid receiving “special 
compensation,” a broker or dealer relying on this exclusion must 
receive only commissions, markups, and markdowns.22   Bundled Fees.  The SEC has stated a broker or dealer that receives a 
fee based on a percentage of assets that compensates the broker or 
dealer for both advisory and brokerage services receives “special 
compensation.”23  Separate or Identifiable Charge.  The SEC has stated that a broker-
dealer charges “special compensation” when it charges its customer a 
separate fee for investment advice, or when it charges its customers 
different commission rates, one with advice and one without, because 
the difference represents a clearly definable charge for investment 
advice.24
Broker-Dealer Agents.  The SEC staff has stated that a registered 
representative of a broker-dealer can rely on the exclusion if she is: (i) 
giving advice within the scope of her employment with the broker-
20 
Release 1092, supra note 3; Henry S. Miller Companies of Dallas, Texas, SEC Staff No-Action Letter 
(Feb. 21, 1975).  
21  
Certain Broker-Dealers Deemed Not To Be Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 
2376 (Apr. 12, 2005) (“Release 2376”), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/34-51523.pdf. 
22  
Section 202(a)(11)(C).  See S. Rep. No. 76-1775 at 22; H.R. Rep. No. 76-2639 at 28 (the term 
“investment adviser” was “so defined as specifically to exclude . . . brokers (insofar as their advice is 
merely incidental to brokerage transactions for which they receive only brokerage commissions.”)).  
23  
In Release 2376, the SEC adopted a rule that, among other things, deemed brokers charging asset-
based brokerage fees (rather than commissions, mark-ups, or mark-downs) not to be investment 
advisers based solely on their receipt of special compensation.  The rule was vacated for other reasons
based brokerage fees (rather than commissions, mark-ups, or mark-downs) not to be investment 
advisers based solely on their receipt of special compensation.  The rule was vacated for other reasons 
by a federal court in March 2007.  Financial Planning Association v. SEC, 482 F.3d (D.C. Cir. 2007).  
See also National Regulatory Services, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec 2, 1992) at n.3. 
24  
Final Extension of Temporary Exemption from the Investment Advisers Act for Certain Brokers and 
Dealers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 626 (Apr. 27, 1978) (“Release 626”).  See also, Opinion 
of the General Counsel Relating to Section 203(b)(3)of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, 
Investment Advisers Act No. 2 (Oct. 28, 1940).   The Commission proposed to codify this 
interpretation in a rule.  See Interpretive Rule under the Advisers Act Affecting Broker-Dealers, 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2652 (Sept. 24, 2007).
6  dealer; (ii) the advice is incidental to her employer’s brokerage 
activities; and (iii) she receives no special compensation for her 
advice.25   Brokerage Customers.  The SEC has stated that a broker-dealer does 
not have to treat its brokerage customers to whom it provides 
investment advice as advisory clients simply because it is registered 
under the Advisers Act.  It must treat as an advisory client only those 
accounts for which it provides advice (i.e., non-incidental advice) or 
receives compensation (i.e., special compensation) that subjects the 
broker-dealer to the Advisers Act.26 
4. 
Publishers.  Publishers are excluded from the Act, but only if a publication:  
(i) provides only impersonal advice (i.e., advice not tailored to the individual 
needs of a specific client);27 (ii) is “bona fide,” (containing disinterested 
commentary and analysis rather than promotional material disseminated by 
someone touting particular securities); and (iii) is of general and regular
commentary and analysis rather than promotional material disseminated by 
someone touting particular securities); and (iii) is of general and regular 
circulation (rather than issued from time to time in response to episodic 
market activity).28  
5. 
Government Securities Advisers.  This exclusion is available to persons and 
firms whose advice is limited to certain securities issued by or guaranteed by 
the U.S. government.29   
6. 
Credit Rating Agencies.  This exclusion is available to any rating agency 
regulated under section 15E of the Exchange Act as a “nationally recognized 
statistical rating organization.”30
25  
Institute of Certified Financial Planners, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Jan. 21, 1986).  
26  
Release 626, supra note 24.  The Commission has proposed to codify this interpretation in a rule.  See 
Interpretive Rule under the Advisers Act Affecting Broker-Dealers, supra note 24. 
27  
See Weiss Research, Inc., et al, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2525 (June 22, 2006) (newsletter 
publisher deemed to be an investment adviser providing personalized investment advice whose “auto-
trading” program sent signals to broker-dealer, which automatically traded subscriber/customer 
securities consistent with signals).  
28 
Section 202(a)(11)(D).  See Lowe v. SEC, 472 U.S. 181 (1985); SEC v. Gun Soo Oh Park, A/K/A Tokyo 
Joe, and Tokyo Joe’s Societe Anonyme Corp., 99 F. Supp. 2d 889 (N.D. Ill. 2000).  If a publisher is 
required to register as a result of some other advisory activity, the adviser is subject to all of the
required to register as a result of some other advisory activity, the adviser is subject to all of the 
provisions of the Act and SEC rules with respect to the publication. See Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 870 (July 15, 1983)(“Release 870”). 
29 
Section 202(a)(11)(E).  The scope of the exception includes persons whose advice is limited to:  
(i) direct obligations of the Federal government (e.g., U.S. Treasury obligations); (ii) securities subject 
to guarantees from the Federal government; and (iii) securities issued by or guaranteed by corporations 
whose securities are designated by the Secretary of the Treasury as exempt from the Exchange Act.  
The SEC staff has stated that advice about repurchase agreements collateralized by U.S. government 
securities does not fall within the exception.  J.Y. Barry Arbitrage Management, Inc., SEC Staff No-
Action Letter (Oct. 18, 1989).  See also In the Matter of Rauscher Pierce Refsnes, Inc., et al.,
securities does not fall within the exception.  J.Y. Barry Arbitrage Management, Inc., SEC Staff No-
Action Letter (Oct. 18, 1989).  See also In the Matter of Rauscher Pierce Refsnes, Inc., et al., 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1863 (Apr. 6, 2000) (“Because Rauscher’s advice was not 
limited to Treasury securities or other government securities as described in section 202(a)(11)(E), that 
provision did not operate to exclude Rauscher from the definition of investment adviser.”). 
30  
Section 202(a)(11)(F), containing this exclusion for rating agencies, was added to the Act by the Credit 
Rating Agency Reform Act of 2006.  Pub. L. No. 109-291, 120 Stat. 1327 (Sept. 29, 2006).
7  7. 
Family Offices.  A family office that manages the wealth and other affairs of 
a single family is excluded from the investment adviser definition if it: (i) 
provides investment advice only to family clients; (ii) is wholly owned by 
family clients and exclusively controlled by family members and/or certain 
family entities; and (iii) does not hold itself out31 to the public as an 
investment adviser.32 
a. 
Family Members.  A family office’s “family members” include all 
lineal descendants (including adopted children, stepchildren, foster 
children, and, in some cases, persons who were minors when a family 
member became their legal guardian) of a common ancestor (no more 
than 10 generations removed from the youngest generation of family 
members), and such lineal descendants’ spouses or spousal 
equivalents.33 
b. 
Family Clients.  The family office’s clients generally may include 
family members; key employees; any non-profit or charitable
equivalents.33 
b. 
Family Clients.  The family office’s clients generally may include 
family members; key employees; any non-profit or charitable 
organization funded exclusively by family clients; any estate of a 
family member, former family member, key employee, or subject to 
certain conditions, a former key employee; certain family client trusts; 
and any company wholly owned by and operated for the sole benefit of 
family clients.34 
8. 
Governments and Political Subdivisions.  The Act does not apply to the U.S. 
government, state governments and their political subdivisions, and their 
agencies or instrumentalities, including their officers, agents, or employees 
acting in their official capacities.35   
9. 
Non-U.S. Advisers.  There is no exemption for non-U.S. advisers.  Non-U.S. 
persons advising U.S. persons are subject to the Act and must register under 
the Act36 unless eligible for one of the exemptions discussed below (e.g., the
persons advising U.S. persons are subject to the Act and must register under 
the Act36 unless eligible for one of the exemptions discussed below (e.g., the 
“foreign private adviser” registration exemption).37  The SEC does not 
accept “home state registration” of non-U.S. advisers in lieu of SEC
31  
See infra notes 69 to 72 and accompanying text for discussion of “holding out.”   
32  
Rule 202(a)(11)(G)-1(b)(defining “family office” for purpose of section 202(a)(11)(G), which was 
added to the Act by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 
111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010) (“Dodd-Frank Act”)).  Family offices that do not meet these conditions 
must register with the SEC unless another exemption is available.  Rule 202(a)(11)(G)-1(e)(2).  
33  
Rule 202(a)(11)(G)-1(d)(6). 
34  
Rule 202(a)(11)(G)-1(d)(4).  Key employees include executive officers, directors, trustees, general 
partners, or any person serving in a similar capacity for the family office or its affiliated family office, 
and certain employees who have participated in the investment activities of the family office or its 
affiliated family office for at least 12 months.   Rule 202(a)(11)(G)-1(d)(8). 
35  
Section 202(b). 
36
affiliated family office for at least 12 months.   Rule 202(a)(11)(G)-1(d)(8). 
35  
Section 202(b). 
36  
In the Matter of Banco Espirito Santo S.A., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3304 (Oct. 24, 2011) 
(The SEC brought an enforcement action against a commercial bank headquartered in Portugal for 
violating section 203(a) by marketing its portfolio of financial services, including offering securities 
and providing advice regarding those securities, to U.S. residents who were primarily Portuguese 
immigrants without registering with the Commission.). 
37  
See Section III. B. 3 of this outline for discussion of the foreign private adviser exemption.
8  registration.38 
The SEC has authority to designate, by rule or order, other persons who are not 
within the intent of the definition of investment adviser.39   
III. Which Investment Advisers Must Register Under the Advisers Act? 
A firm that falls within the definition of “investment adviser” (and is not eligible for 
one of the exclusions) must register under the Advisers Act, unless it (i) is prohibited 
from registering under the Act because it is a smaller firm regulated by one or more of 
the states or (ii) qualifies for an exception from the Act’s registration requirement.40 All 
advisers, registered or not, are subject to the Act’s anti-fraud provisions. 
A.  Prohibitions from Registration   
Until 1996, most investment advisers were subject to regulation by both the SEC 
and one or more state regulatory agencies. The Act was amended in 1996 and 
again in 2010 to allocate regulatory responsibility between the SEC and the
and one or more state regulatory agencies. The Act was amended in 1996 and 
again in 2010 to allocate regulatory responsibility between the SEC and the 
states.41  Today, most small advisers and “mid-sized advisers” are subject to state 
regulation of advisers and are prohibited from registering with the SEC.42  Most 
large advisers (unless an exemption is available) must register with the SEC, and 
state adviser laws are preempted for these advisers.43
38  
On  June 12, 2007, the SEC held a “roundtable discussion” at which the possibility of revising its 
approach to mutual recognition was discussed.  The SEC press release concerning the roundtable stated 
that “selective mutual recognition would involve the SEC permitting certain types of foreign financial 
intermediaries to provide services to U.S. investors under an abbreviated registration system, provided 
those entities are supervised in a foreign jurisdiction under a securities regulatory regime substantially 
comparable (but not necessarily identical) to that in the United States.”  See 
http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/mutualrecognition.htm.   
39  
Section 202(a)(11)(H).  See, e.g., International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and 
International Development, Investment Advisers Act Release Nos. 1971 (Sept. 4, 2001) (notice) and 
1955 (July 27, 2001) (order) (declaring World Bank instrumentalities not to be investment advisers
International Development, Investment Advisers Act Release Nos. 1971 (Sept. 4, 2001) (notice) and 
1955 (July 27, 2001) (order) (declaring World Bank instrumentalities not to be investment advisers 
under the Act).  Section 202(a)(11)(H) had been designated as section 202(a)(11)(F) until 2006, and as 
202(a)(11)(G) until 2011, when it was re-designated by the Dodd-Frank Act. 
40  
Section 203(a).   
41  
 National Securities Markets Improvements Act of 1996 (“NSMIA”), Pub. L. No. 104-290, 110 Stat. 
3416 (1996); Dodd-Frank Act, supra note 32.  Most of the provisions amending the Advisers Act to 
allocate regulatory responsibilities between the SEC and state governments have been codified in 
section 203A. 
42  
Section 203A(a).  Section 203A creates a prohibition, not an exemption.  See In the Matter of Matthew 
P. Brady, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2178 (Sept. 30, 2003); In the Matter of Warwick
Section 203A(a).  Section 203A creates a prohibition, not an exemption.  See In the Matter of Matthew 
P. Brady, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2178 (Sept. 30, 2003); In the Matter of Warwick 
Capital Management Inc., Initial Decision Release No. 327 (Feb. 15, 2007); Credit Agricole Asset 
Management Alternative Investments, Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 7, 2006).  See also In the 
Matter of Royal Oak Capital Management, LLC, Investment advisers Act Release No. 3354 (Jan. 17, 
2012) (cancelling the registration of an adviser that did not have required amount of assets under 
management to remain registered with the SEC).  
43  
See Sections 203(a) (registration required) and 203A(b) (preemption of state law).
9  1. 
Operation of Section 203A of the Advisers Act 
a. 
Small Advisers. Advisers with less than $25 million of assets under 
management are regulated by one or more states unless the state in 
which the adviser has its principal office and place of business has not 
enacted a statute regulating advisers.44  Thus, unless an exemption is 
available (discussed below), only a small adviser with its principal 
office and place of business in Wyoming (which has not enacted a 
statute regulating advisers) may register with the SEC. 
b. 
Mid-Sized Advisers.  Generally advisers with between $25 million and 
$100 million of assets under management45 are regulated by one or 
more states if (i) the adviser is registered with the state where it has its 
principal office and place of business (e.g., it cannot take advantage of 
an exemption from state registration), and (ii) the adviser is “subject to 
examination” by that state securities authority.46  Unless an exemption
an exemption from state registration), and (ii) the adviser is “subject to 
examination” by that state securities authority.46  Unless an exemption 
is available, a mid-sized adviser with its principal office and place of 
business in New York or Wyoming is not “subject to examination” and 
must register with the SEC.47 
c. 
Non-U.S. Advisers.  Advisers whose principal office and place of 
business is outside the United States are not prohibited from 
registering with the SEC and thus are not subject to the assets under 
management thresholds.48  A non-U.S. adviser giving advice to U.S. 
persons49 must register with the SEC (and thus may avoid registration 
with state regulators), unless an exemption from registration is
44  
Section 203A(a)(1) prohibits any adviser from registering with the SEC that is regulated or is required 
to be regulated in the state in which it maintains its principal office and place of business.  The SEC 
interprets this provision to mean the prohibition applies only to an adviser that maintains its principal 
office and place of business in a state that has enacted an investment adviser statute.  Rules 
Implementing Amendments to the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, Investment Advisers Act Release 
No. 1633 (May 15, 1997) (“Release 1633”) at n.83 and accompanying text.
45  
The Dodd-Frank Act raised the threshold for advisers to register with the SEC to $100 million of assets 
under management.   See section 410 of Dodd-Frank Act.  A mid-sized adviser may register when it 
acquires $100 million of assets under management and must register once it obtains $110 million of 
assets under management, unless some other exemption is available.  Rule 203A-1(a)(1).  Once 
registered with the SEC, a mid-sized adviser is not required to withdraw from SEC registration and 
register with the states until the adviser has less than $90 million of assets under management.  Id.
46 
Section 203A(a)(2) prohibits a mid-sized adviser from registering with the SEC if the adviser is 
required to be registered as an adviser in the state where it has its principal office and place of business 
and is subject to examination by that state.  See Rule Implementing Amendments to the Investment 
Advisers Act of 1940, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3221 (June 22, 2011) (“Release 3221”).  
47  
See Instructions for Item 2 of Part 1A of Form ADV; Division of Investment Management: Frequently 
Asked Questions Regarding Mid-Sized Advisers, available at 
www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/midsizedadviserinfo.htm.  New York and Wyoming did not advise 
the SEC staff that advisers registered with them are subject to examination.  See Release 3221 at n.152, 
supra note 46. 
48  
See Release 1633,  supra note 44 at Section II. E.  An adviser with a principal office and place of
supra note 46. 
48  
See Release 1633,  supra note 44 at Section II. E.  An adviser with a principal office and place of 
business in another country does not have a principal office and place of business in a U.S. state that 
regulates investment advisers. 
49  
See infra note 64 for discussions of the definition of a “U.S. person.”
10  available (in which case it may be subject to state registration 
requirements).50 
2. 
Exceptions to Prohibition.  Section 203A and SEC rules carve out several 
exceptions from the assets under management tests. 
a. 
Advisers to Investment Companies.  Advisers to investment companies 
registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (the 
“Investment Company Act”) must register with the SEC.51  The 
exception is not available to an adviser that simply gives advice about 
investing in investment companies.52 
b. 
Advisers to Business Development Companies.  Advisers with at least 
$25 million of assets under management that advise a company which 
has elected to be a business development company pursuant to section 
54 of the Investment Company Act must register with the SEC.53 
c. 
Pension Consultants.  Advisers providing advisory services to 
employee benefit plans having at least $200M of assets may register
54 of the Investment Company Act must register with the SEC.53 
c. 
Pension Consultants.  Advisers providing advisory services to 
employee benefit plans having at least $200M of assets may register 
with the SEC (even though the consultant does not itself have those 
assets under management).54 
d. 
Related Advisers.  Advisers that control, are controlled by, or are under 
common control of an SEC-registered adviser may register with the 
SEC, but only if they have the same principal office and place of 
business.55 
e. 
Newly-Formed Advisers.  Advisers that are not registered, and have a 
reasonable expectation that they will be eligible for SEC registration 
within 120 days of registering, may register with the SEC.56
50  
See Section III. A. 3 of this outline for discussion of exemption from registration for foreign private 
advisers.  
51  
Sections 203A(a)(1)(B); 203A(a)(2)(A). 
52  
See Instructions for Item 2 of Part 1A of Form ADV.   
53  
Section 203A(a)(2)(A). See also Item 2.A.(6) of Part 1A of Form ADV.   
54  
Rule 203(A)-2(a).  In June 2011, the SEC increased the plan assets threshold required for pension 
consultants from $50 million to $200 million. See Release 3221, supra note 46.  In May 2005, the SEC 
staff published a report detailing concerns with conflicts of pension fund consultants who help pension 
managers evaluate money managers.  See Staff Report Concerning Staff Examinations of Certain Select 
Pension Fund Consultants, available at www.sec.gov/news/studies/pensionexamstudy.pdf.  The SEC 
settled an administrative proceeding with a pension consultant that breached its fiduciary obligations by
settled an administrative proceeding with a pension consultant that breached its fiduciary obligations by 
failing to disclose conflicts of interest.  In the Matter of Yanni Partners, Inc., Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 2643 (Sept. 4, 2007) (pension consultant held itself out to be “independent” of money 
managers sold subscriptions to data base to money managers it was evaluating).  
55  
Rule 203A-2(b).  
56  
Rule 203A-2(c).   An adviser relying on this exception must file an amendment to its Form ADV at the 
end of the 120 days indicating whether it has become eligible for SEC registration, or must withdraw 
its SEC registration.  An adviser that expects to be eligible for SEC registration because of the amount 
of its assets under management must have $100M or more of assets under management no later than 
120 days after its registration is declared effective.  See Instructions for Item 2 of Part 1A of Form 
ADV.
11  f. 
Multi-State Advisers.  Advisers that would otherwise be obligated to 
register with 15 or more states may register with the SEC.57 
g. 
Internet Advisers.  Certain advisers who provide advice though an 
interactive web site may register with the SEC.58 
3. 
State Law Still Applicable to SEC-Registered Advisers.  Although state 
investment adviser statutes do not apply to SEC-registered advisers, other 
state laws, including other state securities laws, do apply.  In addition, state 
laws may (and most state laws continue to) require an SEC-registered 
adviser to: 
a. 
comply with state anti-fraud prohibitions; 
b. 
provide the state regulator with a copy of its SEC registration; 
c. 
pay state licensing and renewal fees; and 
d. 
license persons giving advice on behalf of the adviser, but only if the 
person has a place of business in the state.59 
4. 
Federal Anti-Fraud Law Still Applicable to State-Registered Advisers.  The
person has a place of business in the state.59 
4. 
Federal Anti-Fraud Law Still Applicable to State-Registered Advisers.  The 
SEC continues to institute enforcement actions against state-registered 
advisers charging violations of section 206 of the Act.60  
B. 
Exemptions from Registration
The Advisers Act provides several exemptions from registration.  The exemptions 
are voluntary; advisers eligible for them can nonetheless register with the SEC.61  
1. 
Intrastate Advisers.  Available to an adviser (i) all of whose clients are 
residents of the state in which the adviser maintains its principal office and 
place of business and (ii) that does not give advice about securities on any 

57  
Section 203A(a)(2)(A); Rule 203A-2(d).   
58  
Rule 203A-2(e).  Exemption for Certain Investment Advisers Operating Through the Internet, 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2091 (Dec. 12, 2002), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/finalarchive/finalarchive2002.shtml.
59  
SEC-registered advisers can comply with state requirements that they provide states with a copy of 
their registration (so-called “notice filings”), pay state registration fees, and license advisory personnel 
(in most states) through the electronic filing system (IARD) discussed below. 
60  
See, e.g., In the Matter of James William Fuller, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1842 (Oct. 4, 
1999); In the Matter of Robert Radano, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2750 (June 30, 2008); 
SEC v. Aaron Donald Vallett and A.D. Vallett & Co., LLC, Litigation Release No. 21557 (June 16, 
2010).  Most of the anti-fraud rules adopted by the SEC pursuant to its authority under section 206(4) 
of the Act (and discussed below) are not applicable to state-registered advisers.  States have, however, 
adopted similar rules in many cases. 
61 
Persons who voluntarily register under the Advisers Act, in circumstances where their registration may
adopted similar rules in many cases. 
61 
Persons who voluntarily register under the Advisers Act, in circumstances where their registration may 
not be required, are subject to all of the provisions and rules under the Advisers Act applicable to 
persons required to register. See Release 870, supra note 28.  State regulatory law is not preempted for 
an adviser taking advantage of one of the exceptions from registration and thus the adviser may be 
required to register with one or more state securities regulators.  See discussion of state preemption in 
Section III. A. of this outline.
12  national exchange.62 
Updated 2. 
Advisers to Insurance Companies.  Available to an adviser whose only 
clients are insurance companies.63 
3. 
Foreign Private Advisers.  Available to an adviser that (i) has no place of 
business in the United States; (ii) has, in total, fewer than 15 clients in the 
United States and investors in the United States in private funds advised by 
the adviser; (iii) has aggregate assets under management attributable to these 
clients and investors of less than $25 million; and (iv) does not hold itself 
out generally to the public in the United States as an investment adviser.64  The exemption for foreign private advisers was added by the Dodd-Frank 
Act and replaces the private adviser exemption (i.e., an exemption for any 
adviser with fewer than 15 clients) previously provided by the same section 
of the Act, which was repealed.  The SEC incorporated many of the rules 
from “old” section 203(b)(3).   
a. 
Counting Clients 
(i)
of the Act, which was repealed.  The SEC incorporated many of the rules 
from “old” section 203(b)(3).   
a. 
Counting Clients 
(i) 
Multiple Persons as a Single Client.  Rule 202(a)(30)-1 provides 
that the following can be considered a single client:65 
(A) a natural person and (i) any minor child of the natural person; 
(ii) any relative, spouse, spousal equivalent, or relative of the 
spouse or of the spousal equivalent of the natural person with 
the same principal residence; and (iii) all accounts or trusts of 
which the persons described above are the only primary 
beneficiaries; or  
(B) a corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability 
company, trusts or other legal organization that receives 
investment advice based on its investment objectives (rather 
than the individual investment objectives of its owners),66
62  
Section 203(b)(1).  The SEC staff takes the position that advice regarding investment companies 
involves advice about “listed securities” if the investment company invests in listed securities.  Roy 
Heybrock, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Apr. 5, 1992). 
63 
Section 203(b)(2).  See also TACT Asset Mgmt., Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Oct. 24, 2012) 
(stating that the staff would not recommend enforcement proceedings if a U.S. investment adviser 
whose only client is a foreign insurance company does not register with the SEC).   
64  
Section 203(b)(3) (exempting “any investment adviser that is a foreign private adviser”); Section 
202(a)(30) (defining a “foreign private adviser”). Rule 202(a)(30)-1 defines the term “in the United 
States” by reference to the definitions of a “U.S. person” and the “United States” in Regulation S under 
the Securities Act, except that the rule treats as “in the United States” any discretionary account owned
the Securities Act, except that the rule treats as “in the United States” any discretionary account owned 
by a U.S. person and managed by a non-U.S. affiliate of the adviser.  An adviser must assess whether a 
person is “in the United States” at the time the person becomes a client or, in the case of an investor in 
a private fund, each time the investor acquires securities issued by the fund.  See rule 202(a)(30)-1, at 
note to paragraph (c)(3)(i).   
65  
Rule 202(a)(30)-1.  The rule provides a non-exclusive safe harbor for counting clients for purposes of 
section 203(b)(3).  See rule 202(a)(30)-1, at note to paragraphs (a) and (b).   
66  
An adviser must count an owner (e.g., a limited partner) as a client if it provides advice to that owner 
“separate and apart” from the advice provided to the entity.  Rule 202(a)(30)-1(b)(1).  Cf. Latham &
13  and two or more of these entities that have identical owners. 
(ii) 
“Look through” private funds.  An adviser must count both its 
direct clients and each investor in any “private fund” it advises. 
No Double Counting.  An adviser may treat as a single investor 
any person who is an investor in two or more of the adviser’s 
private funds.67 
Nominal Holders. An adviser may be required to also “look 
through” persons who are nominal holders of a security issued by 
a private fund to count the investors in the nominal holder when 
determining if the adviser qualifies for the exemption.  For 
example, holders of the securities of any feeder fund in a master-
feeder arrangement may be deemed to be the investors of the 
master fund.68 
b. 
Holding Out.  The SEC staff views a person as holding himself out as 
an adviser if he advertises as an investment adviser or financial 
planner, uses letterhead indicating activity as an investment adviser, or
an adviser if he advertises as an investment adviser or financial 
planner, uses letterhead indicating activity as an investment adviser, or 
maintains a telephone listing or otherwise lets it be known that he will 
accept new advisory clients,69 or hires a person to solicit clients on his 
behalf.70 
(i) 
Participation in Non-Public Offerings.  Foreign private advisers 
will not be deemed to be holding themselves out generally to the 
public in the United States as an investment adviser solely 
because they participate in a non-public offering in the United 
States of securities issued by a private fund pursuant to an 
exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933.71 
(ii) Use of the Internet.  An adviser using the Internet to provide 
information about itself ordinarily would be “holding itself out” 
as an adviser.  However, the SEC has stated that it will not 
consider a non-U.S. adviser, including foreign private advisers, to
information about itself ordinarily would be “holding itself out” 
as an adviser.  However, the SEC has stated that it will not 
consider a non-U.S. adviser, including foreign private advisers, to 
be holding itself out as an adviser if: 
(A) Prominent Disclaimer.  The adviser’s web site includes a
Watkins, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 24, 1998); Burr, Egan, Deleage & Co., Inc., SEC Staff 
No-Action Letter (Apr. 27, 1987).  
67  
Rule 202(a)(30)-1, at note to paragraph (c)(2). 
68  
Exemptions for Advisers to Venture Capital Funds, Private Fund Advisers With Less Than $150 
Million in Assets Under Management, and Foreign Private Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release 
No.3222 (June 22, 2011)(“Release 3222”) at Section II.C.2. 
69  
See, e.g., William Bloor, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 15, 1980); Richard J. Shaker, SEC Staff 
No-Action Letter (Aug. 1, 1977); Al O’Brien Associates, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Oct. 6, 1973). 
70  
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 688 (July 15, 1979) at n.9.  See also Lamp Technologies, Inc., 
SEC Staff No-Action Letter (May 29, 1997) (investment adviser not “holding itself out generally to the 
public as an investment adviser” solely by virtue of posting information about certain private funds
public as an investment adviser” solely by virtue of posting information about certain private funds 
(e.g., hedge funds) on a password-protected web site that is accessible only by accredited investors). 
71
Rule 202(a)(30)-1(d).
14  prominent disclaimer making it clear that its web site 
materials are not directed to U.S. persons; and 
(B) Procedures.  The adviser implements procedures reasonably 
designed to guard against directing information about its 
advisory services to U.S. persons (e.g., obtaining residency 
information before sending further information).72  
4. 
Charitable Organizations and Plans.  Available to an adviser that is a 
charitable organization or a charitable organization’s employee benefit plan, 
including a trustee, officer, employee, or volunteer of the organization or 
plan to the extent that the person is acting within the scope of his 
employment or duties.73 
5. 
Commodity Trading Advisors  
a. 
Generally.  Available to any adviser that is registered with the U.S. 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) as a commodity 
trading advisor and whose business does not consist primarily of acting 
as an investment adviser and that does not advise a registered
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) as a commodity 
trading advisor and whose business does not consist primarily of acting 
as an investment adviser and that does not advise a registered 
investment company or a business development company.74  
b. 
Commodity Trading Advisors to Private Funds.  Available to any 
adviser registered with the CFTC as a commodity trading advisor that 
advises a private fund, provided that the adviser must register with the 
SEC if its business becomes predominantly the provision of securities-
related advice.75 
6. 
Private Fund Advisers.  Available to an adviser solely to private funds that 
has less than $150 million in assets under management in the United 
States.76  An adviser that has any other type of client is not eligible for the 
exemption.77
72  
Statement of the Commission Regarding Use of Internet Web Sites to Offer Securities, Solicit Securities 
Transactions or Advertise Investment Services Offshore, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1710  
(Mar. 23, 1998) section VI, available at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/interparchive/interparch1998.shtml. 
73 
Sections 203(b)(4) and (5) were added by the Philanthropy Protection Act of 1995, Pub. L. No. 104-62, 
109 Stat. 682 (1995).  See also Sisters of Mercy, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Oct. 1, 2009). 
74  
Section 203(b)(6) (re-designated as 203(b)(6)(A) by Dodd-Frank Act) was added by the Commodity 
Futures Modernization Act of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763 (2000), which also amended 
the Act’s definition of “security” in section 202(a)(18) of the Act to include certain “securities futures.”  
The Act repealed the ban on single stock or narrow-based stock index futures and established a
The Act repealed the ban on single stock or narrow-based stock index futures and established a 
framework for shared jurisdiction over the trading of these instruments and market participants.  See 
Exchange Act Release No. 44288 (May 9, 2001), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/34-
44288.htm. 
75  
Section 203(b)(6)(B) of the Advisers Act (added by the Dodd-Frank Act). 
76  
Section 203(m) of the Advisers Act (added by the Dodd-Frank Act).   The SEC adopted rule 203(m)-1 
on June 22, 2011 to implement the section.  See Release 3222, supra note 68. 
77  
Two nominally separate but related advisers may be considered to be one adviser (and their assets 
aggregated) if they do not operate sufficiently independent of one another.
15  a. 
Private Funds.  A “private fund” is an issuer of securities that would be 
an investment company “but for” the exceptions provided for in 
section 3(c)(1) or 3(c)(7) of the Investment Company Act.78 
(i) 
Section 3(c)(1) is available to a fund that does not publicly offer its 
securities and has 100 or fewer beneficial owners of its 
outstanding securities. 
(ii) 
Section 3(c)(7) is available to a fund that does not publicly offer its 
securities and limits its owners to qualified purchasers.79 
b. 
Calculating Private Fund Assets 
(i) 
Method of Calculation.  Generally, advisers must include the 
value of all private funds managed, including the value of any 
uncalled capital commitments.80  Value is based on market value 
of those assets, or the fair value of those assets where market 
value is unavailable, and must calculate the assets on a gross 
basis, i.e., without deducting liabilities, such as accrued fees and 
expenses or the amount of any borrowing.81  
(ii)
value is unavailable, and must calculate the assets on a gross 
basis, i.e., without deducting liabilities, such as accrued fees and 
expenses or the amount of any borrowing.81  
(ii) 
Annual Assessment.  An adviser must assess annually whether it 
has $150 million or more of private fund assets under 
management. An adviser that meets or exceeds the $150 
threshold must register with the Commission.82 
c. 
Non-U.S. Advisers.  An adviser with a principal office and place of 
business outside the United States may exclude consideration of non-
U.S. clients, i.e., it may rely on the exemption if (a) all of its clients 
that are United States persons83 are qualifying private funds; and (b) 
any management at a U.S. place of business by the adviser is solely
78  
Section 202(a)(29) of the Advisers Act.   
79  
The term “qualified purchasers” is defined in section 2(a)(51) of the Investment Company Act. 
80  
Form ADV: Instructions for Part 1A, instr. 5.b.(4). Proprietary assets, i.e, those of the adviser or its 
principals may not be excluded.  Form ADV: Instructions for Part1A, instr. 5.b.(1). 
81  
Id.  The SEC has recognized that, although many advisers will calculate the fair value of their private 
fund assets in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) or another 
international accounting standard, other advisers acting consistently and in good faith may utilize 
another fair valuation standard.  Release 3222, supra note 68 at nn.364-365 and accompanying text.  
Consistent with this good faith requirement, the SEC expects that an adviser that calculates fair value in 
accordance with GAAP or another basis of accounting for financial reporting purposes will also use
accordance with GAAP or another basis of accounting for financial reporting purposes will also use 
that same basis for purposes of determining the fair value of its regulatory assets under management.  
Id. at n.365.
82   
Rule 203(m)-1(c).  A private fund adviser that had complied with all SEC reporting requirements 
applicable to an exempt reporting adviser, but reported in its annual updating amendment that fund 
assets exceeded $150 million, has up to 90 days after filing the annual updating amendment to apply 
for SEC registration, and may continue doing business as a private fund adviser during this time.  
General Instruction 15 to Form ADV. 
83  
Similar to the foreign private adviser exemption, a “United States person” generally is a “U.S. person,” 
as defined in Regulation S under the Securities Act, except that a discretionary or other fiduciary 
account also is a “United States person” if the account is held for the benefit of a United States person 
by a non-U.S. fiduciary who is a related person of the adviser.  Rule 203(m)-1(d)(8).
16  attributed to $150 million of private fund assets.84 
d. 
Annual Report.  An adviser relying on the private fund adviser 
exemption must annually file a report on Form ADV to the SEC 85 and 
is subject to examination.  Other provisions of the Act and SEC rules 
applicable only to registered advisers do not apply.  The SEC refers to 
these advisers as “exempt reporting advisers.” 
7. 
Venture Capital Advisers.  Available to an adviser that solely advises one or 
more “venture capital funds” as defined by SEC rule (regardless of the 
amount of assets managed).86  
a. 
Definition.  To qualify as a “venture capital fund,” a fund must be a 
“private fund”87 that:  
(i) 
represents to investors that the fund pursues a venture capital 
strategy;88 
(ii) 
does not provide investors with redemption rights;89 
(iii) holds no more than 20% of the fund’s assets in non-“qualifying 
investments” (excluding cash and certain short-term holdings)
(ii) 
does not provide investors with redemption rights;89 
(iii) holds no more than 20% of the fund’s assets in non-“qualifying 
investments” (excluding cash and certain short-term holdings)   
Qualifying investment means generally directly acquired 
investments in equity securities of private companies (generally, 
companies that at the time of investment have not made a public 
offering) and that do not incur leverage or borrow in connection 
with the venture capital fund investment and distribute proceeds 
of such borrowing to the fund (i.e., have not been acquired in a 
leveraged buy-out transaction); and  
(iv) does not borrow (or otherwise incur leverage) more than 15% of 
the fund’s assets, and then only on a short-term basis (i.e., for no 
more than 120-days).90
84  
Rule 203(m)-1(b)(1) and (2).  The term “place of business” has the same meaning as in the exemption 
for foreign private advisers, discussed above.  See Section III. B. 3. of this outline.  Rule 203(m)-
1(d)(2).   
85  
Rule 204-2.  The report must be filed within 60 days of relying on the private fund adviser exemption.  
Only portions of Form ADV must be completed.  General Instruction 13 to Form ADV.  An exempt 
reporting adviser is not required to deliver a brochure to its clients. General Instruction 3 to Form 
ADV.
86  
Section 203(l) of the Advisers Act (added by the Dodd-Frank Act).  The SEC adopted rule 203(l)-1 on 
June 22, 2011 to implement the section.  See Release 3222, supra note 68. 
87  
Rule 203(l)-1(a)(5).  In addition, the fund cannot be registered under the Investment Company Act or 
have elected to be treated as a business development company as defined by that Act.  Rule 203(l)-
1(a)(5). 
88  
 Rule 203(l)-1(a)(1). 
89  
 Rule 203(l)-1(a)(4) (the rule permits exceptions in extraordinary circumstances). 
90  
Rule 203(l)-1 contains a grandfathering provision for certain private funds that have sold their initial 
interests in the fund by December 31, 2010, provided that they have represented to their investors that
17  b. 
Non-U.S. Advisers.   The exemption is available to a non-U.S. adviser, 
but (unlike the private fund adviser exception) such an adviser may not 
disregard its non-U.S. advisory activities.91 Thus, all of an adviser’s 
clients, including non-U.S. clients, must be venture capital funds.92  
c. 
Annual Reporting.  An adviser relying on the venture capital adviser 
exemption must annually file a report on Form ADV to the SEC, 93 and 
is subject to examination.  Other provisions of the Act and SEC rules 
applicable only to registered advisers do not apply.  The SEC also 
refers to these advisers as “exempt reporting advisers.” 
8. 
 Advisers to Small Business Investment Companies (“SBICs”).  SBICs, 
licensed by the Small Business Administration, are privately owned and 
managed investment firms that provide venture capital to small businesses 
from the SBIC’s own capital and from funds the SBIC is able to borrow at
managed investment firms that provide venture capital to small businesses 
from the SBIC’s own capital and from funds the SBIC is able to borrow at 
favorable rates through the federal government.94    IV. Who Must Register Under the Advisers Act? 
A. 
The Advisory Firm 
Although many individuals who are employed by advisers fall within the 
definition of “investment adviser,” the SEC generally does not require those 
individuals to register as advisers with the SEC.  Instead, the advisory firm must 
register with the SEC.  The adviser’s registration covers its employees and other 
persons under its control, provided that their advisory activities are undertaken on 
the adviser’s behalf.95 
B. 
Affiliates 
1. 
Integration.  The SEC staff takes the view that advisers and their affiliates 
cannot circumvent the disclosure and other requirements of the Act by 
separately registering under the Act if they are operationally integrated, e.g.,
cannot circumvent the disclosure and other requirements of the Act by 
separately registering under the Act if they are operationally integrated, e.g., 
have the same personnel, capital structures, and investment decision-making 
functions.96
they pursue a venture capital strategy and that they do not issue any interests to any person after July 
21, 2011. 
91   Release 3222, supra note 68.   
92  
Rule 203(l)-1 contains a note the effect of which is to permit a non-U.S. adviser to treat a foreign fund 
it advises as a “private fund” even if the fund does not meet the Act’s definition of a private fund 
because it is not relying on a statutory exemption from the Investment Company Act, but is rather 
relying on the lack of jurisdiction of the U.S.  Release 3222, supra note 68. 
93  
Rule 204-2.   See supra note 85 for a summary of reporting requirements. 
94  
Section 203(b)(7) (added by the Dodd-Frank Act). 
95  
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 688 (July 12, 1979) (persons associated with registered 
adviser need not separately register as investment advisers solely as a result of their activities 
as associated persons).  See also Kevin J. Hughes, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 7, 1983).  
96
as associated persons).  See also Kevin J. Hughes, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 7, 1983).  
96  
The determination of whether an advisory business of two separately formed affiliates may be required 
to be integrated is based on the facts and circumstances.  Release 3222, supra note 68.  See Richard
18   
For example, an adviser managing $200 million of private fund assets could 
not simply reorganize as two separate advisers each of which purported to 
rely on the private fund adviser exemption from registration.97  
2. 
Participating Non-U.S. Affiliates.  The SEC staff takes the view that, under 
certain conditions, a non-U.S. adviser (a “participating affiliate”) does not 
have to register under the Act if it provides advice to U.S. persons through a 
registered affiliate.98  The conditions that must be satisfied include the 
following: 
a. 
an unregistered adviser and its registered affiliate must be separately 
organized; 
b. 
the registered affiliate must be staffed with personnel (located in the 
U.S. or abroad) who are capable of providing investment advice; 
c. 
all personnel of the participating affiliate involved in U.S. advisory 
activities must be deemed “associated persons”99 of the registered 
affiliate; and 
d.
c. 
all personnel of the participating affiliate involved in U.S. advisory 
activities must be deemed “associated persons”99 of the registered 
affiliate; and 
d. 
the SEC must have adequate access to trading and other records of the 
unregistered adviser and to its personnel to the extent necessary to 
enable the SEC to monitor and police conduct that may harm U.S. 
clients or markets.100 
The Commission affirmed these staff positions in the context of the private 
adviser exemptions.101 
3. 
Joint Registration of Affiliates.   
a. 
Special Purpose Vehicles. The SEC staff takes the position that a 
special purpose vehicle (“SPV”) set up by a registered investment 
adviser to serve as the general partner of a pooled investment vehicle 
(e.g., a hedge fund) does not have to separately register as an 
investment adviser if all of the activities of the SPV are subject to the 
registered adviser’s supervision and control,102 its employees are
Ellis, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Sept. 17, 1981); Kenneth Levanthal, SEC Staff No-Action Letter 
(Feb. 7, 1983).  See also Price Waterhouse, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Nov. 22, 1988). 
97  
Release 3222, supra note 68, at Section II.D.  
98  
See Uniao de Bancos de Brasilerios, S.A., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (July 28, 1992); Mercury Asset 
Management, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Apr. 16, 1993); Kleinwort Benson Investment Management 
Ltd., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 15, 1993); Murray Johnston Holdings Ltd., SEC Staff No-
Action Letter (Oct. 7, 1994).  See also Section II. C. of Release 3222 and Section III. B. 3 of this 
outline regarding the exemption for foreign private advisers. 
99  
See Section V. A. 1 of this outline for the definition of “person associated with an investment adviser.”   
100  
See id. 
101  
Release 3222, supra note 68, at Section II.D. 
102  
For guidance regarding application of the staff’s position with respect to directors of an SPV that are
100  
See id. 
101  
Release 3222, supra note 68, at Section II.D. 
102  
For guidance regarding application of the staff’s position with respect to directors of an SPV that are 
independent of the investment adviser, see American Bar Association Subcommittee on Hedge Funds, 
SEC Staff Letter (Jan. 18, 2012) (“ABA Letter 2012”), Question 3, available at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/noaction/2012/aba011812.htm.
19  treated as “supervised persons” of the registered adviser and reported 
as such on its Form ADV, and the SPV is subject to examination by 
the SEC.103 The SEC staff takes the view that this analysis is not 
limited to a registered adviser with a single SPV.104 
b. 
Multiple Entities in Control Relationships.  The SEC staff has taken 
the position that an investment adviser may file (or amend) a single 
Form ADV on behalf of itself and each other adviser that is under 
common control with the filing adviser where the filing adviser and 
each relying adviser collectively conduct a “single advisory 
business.”105  
V.  How Does an Investment Adviser Register Under the Advisers Act? 
A. 
Procedure   
Applicants for registration under the Act must file Form ADV with the SEC.  
Within 45 days the SEC must grant registration or institute an administrative 
proceeding to determine whether registration should be denied. 
1.
Within 45 days the SEC must grant registration or institute an administrative 
proceeding to determine whether registration should be denied. 
1. 
Denial of Registration.  The SEC may deny registration if the adviser is 
subject to a “Statutory Disqualification,” that is, if the adviser or any “person 
associated with the adviser” makes false or misleading statements in its 
registration application, has within the past 10 years been convicted of a 
felony, or if it has been convicted by a court or found by the SEC to have 
violated a securities-related statute or rule, or have been the subject of a 
securities-related injunction, or similar legal action.106 
Person Associated with An Investment Adviser.  These include employees 
(other than clerical employees) of the advisers as well as any persons who 
directly or indirectly control the investment adviser or are controlled by the 
adviser.107  The SEC can deny registration if, for example, the parent
directly or indirectly control the investment adviser or are controlled by the 
adviser.107  The SEC can deny registration if, for example, the parent 
company of an adviser has been convicted of securities fraud even if the 
adviser and its employees have not. 
Non-U.S. Based Offenses.  Statutory Disqualifications include convictions in
103  
American Bar Association Subcommittee on Private Entities, SEC Staff Letter (Dec. 8, 2005) (“ABA 
Letter 2005”), Question G1, available at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/noaction/aba120805.htm. 
104   
ABA Letter 2012, Question 2.  Similarly, under certain circumstances, the staff has indicated that an 
exempt reporting adviser to which a private fund’s day-to-day management responsibility has been 
delegated may satisfy the Form ADV reporting obligations of one or more special purpose entities.  See 
“FAQs” regarding Reporting to the SEC as an Exempt Reporting Adviser (“ERA FAQs”) available at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/iard/iardfaq.shtml#exemptreportingadviser. 
105  
See id. Question 4 (outlining the circumstances under which a filing adviser and one or more relying 
advisers would, in the staff’s view, collectively conduct a single advisory business absent other factors
advisers would, in the staff’s view, collectively conduct a single advisory business absent other factors 
suggesting that they conduct different businesses). Likewise, under certain circumstances, the staff has 
indicated that an exempt reporting adviser may satisfy the Form ADV reporting obligations of one or 
more special purpose entities under its control.  See ERA FAQs. 
106  
Sections 203(c)(2) and (e).   
107  
Section 202(a)(17).
20  non-U.S. courts, and by findings of violations by “foreign financial 
regulatory authorities” enforcing non-U.S. laws.108 
2. 
Qualifications.  There are no “fit and proper” or educational requirements 
for registration as an investment adviser, although certain employees of the 
adviser may have to pass securities examinations in the states in which they 
have a principal place of business. Instead, advisers must disclose to clients 
the background and qualifications of certain of their personnel.109 
B. 
Form ADV   
Form ADV sets forth the information that the SEC requires advisers to provide in 
an application for registration.  Once registered, an adviser must update the form 
at least once a year, and more frequently if required by instructions to the form.110  
Form ADV consists of two parts.111 
1. 
Part 1.  Part 1 is primarily for SEC use.  It requires information about the 
adviser’s business, ownership, clients, employees, business practices
Form ADV consists of two parts.111 
1. 
Part 1.  Part 1 is primarily for SEC use.  It requires information about the 
adviser’s business, ownership, clients, employees, business practices 
(especially those involving potential conflicts with clients), and any 
disciplinary events of the adviser or its employees.  The SEC uses 
information from this part of the form to make its registration determination 
and to manage its regulatory and examination programs.  Part 1 is organized 
in a check-the-box, fill-in-the-blank format.
On June 22, 2011, the SEC amended Part 1A to expand the information 
collected, primarily from advisers to hedge funds and other private funds in 
order to improve the SEC’s ability to oversee registered advisers.  Amended 
Part 1A requires advisers to provide additional information about three areas 
of their operations: (i) additional information about private funds they 
advise; (ii) expanded data provided by advisers about their advisory business 
(including the types of clients they have, their employees, and their advisory 
activities), as well as about their business practices that may present 
significant conflicts of interest; (iii) additional information about advisers’ 
non-advisory activities and their financial industry affiliations.112 

2. 
Part 2.  Amended in 2010, Part 2 is divided into Part 2A and Part 2B and 
sets forth information required in client brochures and brochure 
supplements.113
2. 
Part 2.  Amended in 2010, Part 2 is divided into Part 2A and Part 2B and 
sets forth information required in client brochures and brochure 
supplements.113 

108  
Sections 203(c)(2) and (e).  Non-U.S. based offenses were added to section 203(e) in 1990 by the 
International Securities Enforcement Cooperation Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-550, 104 Stat. 2713 
(Nov. 15, 1990).   
109  
Form ADV, Part 2B. 

110 
Rule 204-1(a).  
111  
Both Part 1 and Part 2A of the Form ADV are filed by registered advisers through the IARD system 
and are available to the public on the Investment Adviser Public Disclosure Website at 
http://www.adviserinfo.sec.gov/(S(hdqosw4svnoutoxsmgo4mizx))/IAPD/Content/IapdMain/iapd_Site
Map.aspx. 
112 

Release 3221, supra note 46.  
113  
On July 28, 2010, the SEC adopted amendments to Part 2 of Form ADV. Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 3060 (July, 2010), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2010/ia-3060.pdf (“Part 2
21  Brochure Part 2A requires an adviser to prepare a narrative “brochure” that 
includes plain English disclosures of, among other things, the adviser’s 
business practices, investment strategies, fees, conflicts of interest, and 
disciplinary information.114  Part 2B requires an adviser to prepare a 
“brochure supplement” that contains information about each advisory 
employee that provides investment advice to its clients, including her 
educational background, business experience, other business activities, and 
disciplinary history.  To satisfy the “brochure rule” (discussed below),115  
the adviser must deliver the brochure (and updates to that brochure) to its 
clients annually and the brochure supplement about a supervisory employee 
to a client at the time the employee begins to provide advisory services to 
that client.116  In addition, the adviser must file its brochure, but not its 
brochure supplement, with the SEC to satisfy its registration 
requirements.117 
C.
that client.116  In addition, the adviser must file its brochure, but not its 
brochure supplement, with the SEC to satisfy its registration 
requirements.117 
C. 
Electronic Filing   
All applications for registration as an adviser with the SEC must be submitted 
electronically through an Internet-based filing system called the Investment 
Adviser Registration Depository (“IARD”).118  The IARD is operated by the 
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), the broker-dealer self-
regulator (formerly, NASD).119 
D. 
Public Availability 
All current information from advisers’ Form ADVs filed with the SEC is publicly 
available through an SEC web-site: www.adviserinfo.sec.gov.  
E. 
Withdrawal of Registration 
Advisers withdraw from registration by filing Form ADV-W.120  An adviser may 
withdraw from registration because it:  (i) ceases to be an investment adviser; (ii) 
is entitled to an exception from the registration requirements; or (iii) no longer is
withdraw from registration because it:  (i) ceases to be an investment adviser; (ii) 
is entitled to an exception from the registration requirements; or (iii) no longer is 
eligible for SEC registration (e.g., it no longer has the requisite amount of assets
Adopting Release”).  For staff responses to frequently asked questions about the amended Part 2, visit 
the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/form-adv-part-2-faq.htm (“Part 2 
FAQs”).  
114  
Prior to the 2010 amendments, Part II of Form ADV was in a check-the-box, fill-in-the-blank format. 
115  
Rule 204-3.   
116  
Rule 204-3(b)(3).  For specific delivery requirements under the brochure rule, see Section VI. B. 12 
below. 
117  
Rule 203-1(a); Rule 204-1(b)(1). 
118  
Rule 203-1(b).  FINRA charges advisers filing fees to defray the cost of maintaining and operating the 
IARD.  To pay the fees, advisers must establish and fund an account with FINRA before making a 
filing.  A fee schedule is available at www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/iard/iardfee.shtml.   
119 
Rule 204-1(b).  For information about electronic filing by advisers, see www.sec.gov/iard.  FINRA 
does not act as a self-regulatory organization with respect to investment advisers. 
120
119 
Rule 204-1(b).  For information about electronic filing by advisers, see www.sec.gov/iard.  FINRA 
does not act as a self-regulatory organization with respect to investment advisers. 
120  
Rule 203-2.  Form ADV-W filings are made electronically through the IARD, and are effective 
immediately.  There are no filing fees for Form ADV-W.
22  under management).121  The SEC also has the authority under section 203(f) of the 
Advisers Act to revoke the registration of an adviser under certain enumerated 
circumstances. 
F. 
Successor Registrations 
An unregistered person that assumes and continues the business of a registered 
investment adviser (which then ceases to do business) may rely on the registration 
of the investment adviser by filing an application for registration within 30 days of 
the succession.122
VI. What Are the Requirements Applicable to a Registered Investment Adviser? 
The Advisers Act does not provide a comprehensive regulatory regime for advisers, but 
rather imposes on them a broad fiduciary duty to act in the best interest of their clients.  
As the Commission explained: 
Unlike the laws of many other countries, the U.S. federal securities laws do not 
prescribe minimum experience or qualification requirements for persons providing 
investment advice.  They do not establish maximum fees that advisers may 
charge.  Nor do they preclude advisers from having substantial conflicts of interest 
that might adversely affect the objectivity of the advice they provide.  Rather, 
investors have the responsibility, based on disclosure they receive, for selecting 
their own advisers, negotiating their own fee arrangements, and evaluating their 
advisers’ conflicts.123 
There are five types of requirements on an adviser:  (i) fiduciary duties to clients; (ii)
their own advisers, negotiating their own fee arrangements, and evaluating their 
advisers’ conflicts.123 
There are five types of requirements on an adviser:  (i) fiduciary duties to clients; (ii) 
substantive prohibitions and requirements; (iii) contractual requirements; 
(iv) recordkeeping requirements; and (v) administrative oversight by the SEC, primarily 
by inspection.  
A. 
Fiduciary Duties to Clients 
Fundamental to the Act is the notion that an adviser is a fiduciary.  As a fiduciary, 
an adviser must avoid conflicts of interest with clients and is prohibited from 
overreaching or taking unfair advantage of a client’s trust.  A fiduciary owes its 
clients more than mere honesty and good faith alone.  A fiduciary must be 
sensitive to the conscious and unconscious possibility of providing less than 
disinterested advice, and it may be faulted even when it does not intend to injure a 
client and even if the client does not suffer a monetary loss.124  The landmark
121  
Before withdrawing from registration, an adviser must arrange for the preservation of records it is 
required to keep under the Act.  Rule 204-2(f). 
122  
Section 203(g).  See Instruction 4 to Part 1A of Form ADV; Registration of Successors to Broker-
Dealers and Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1357 (Dec. 28, 1992) (the 
provision in rule 203-1 referred to in Release 1357 that addressed successions was moved by the SEC 
to Instruction 4 to Form ADV in 2000).  A succession resulting from a change in the place or form of 
organization, or composition of a partnership, i.e., a succession that does not involve a change of 
control, may be completed by amending the predecessor’s Form ADV promptly after the succession. 
Id. 

123  
See Amendments to Form ADV, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2711 (Mar. 3, 2008). 

124  
SEC v. Capital Gains Research Bureau, supra note 2, at 191-192.
23  court decision defining the duties of a fiduciary is Justice Cardozo’s opinion in 
Meinhard v. Salmon, in which he explains that: 
Many forms of conduct permissible in the workaday world for those acting 
at arm’s length are forbidden by those bound by fiduciary ties.  A fiduciary 
is held to something stricter than the morals of the marketplace.  Not honesty 
alone, but the punctilio of an honor the most sensitive, is then the standard of 
behavior.125   
These concepts are embodied in the anti-fraud provisions of the Advisers Act.  As 
the Supreme Court stated in SEC v. Capital Gains Research Bureau, Inc., its 
seminal decision on the fiduciary duties of an adviser under the Act: 
[t]he Investment Advisers Act of 1940 reflects a congressional recognition 
of the delicate fiduciary nature of an investment advisory relationship as 
well as a congressional intent to eliminate, or at least to expose, all conflicts 
of interest which might incline an investment adviser—consciously or
well as a congressional intent to eliminate, or at least to expose, all conflicts 
of interest which might incline an investment adviser—consciously or 
unconsciously—to render advice which was not disinterested.126   
The duty is not specifically set forth in the Act, established by SEC rules, or a 
result of a contract between the adviser and the client (and thus it cannot be 
negotiated away).  Rather, fiduciary duties are imposed on an adviser by operation 
of law because of the nature of the relationship between the two parties.127  It is 
made enforceable by section 206 of the Act,128 which contains the Act’s anti-fraud 
provisions, and incorporated indirectly into the Act in various provisions and 
disclosure requirements discussed below.129 
Several obligations flow from an adviser’s fiduciary duties. 
1. 
Full Disclosure of Material Facts.  Under the Act, an adviser has an 
affirmative obligation of utmost good faith and full and fair disclosure of all
1. 
Full Disclosure of Material Facts.  Under the Act, an adviser has an 
affirmative obligation of utmost good faith and full and fair disclosure of all 
facts material to the client’s engagement of the adviser to its clients, as well 
as a duty to avoid misleading them.130  Accordingly, the duty of an 
investment adviser to refrain from fraudulent conduct includes an obligation 
to disclose material facts to its clients whenever failure to do so would 
defraud or operate as a fraud or deceit upon any client.   
Conflicts of Interest.  This disclosure of material facts is particularly 
pertinent whenever the adviser is faced with a conflict—or a potential
125 
164 N.E. 545, 546 (N.Y. 1928). 
126  
SEC v. Capital Gains Research Bureau, supra note 2, at 190-192.  
127   
See In the Matter of Arleen W. Hughes, Exchange Act Release No. 4048 (Feb 18, 1948). 
128  
Transamerica Mortgage Advisors v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11 (1979) (“[T]he Act’s legislative history leaves 
no doubt that Congress intended to impose enforceable fiduciary obligations.”). 
129  
See Morris v. Wachovia Securities, Inc., 277 F. Supp. 2d 622 (E.D. Va. 2003) (“§206(2) is more than 
an anti-fraud provision because it establishes fiduciary duties for investment advisers.”).  The scope of 
the fiduciary duties is determined by reference to federal court and administrative decisions rather than 
state common law analogies.  Laird v. Integrated Resources, Inc., 897 F.2d 826 (5th Cir. 1990) 
(“[B]ecause state law is not considered, uniformity is promoted.”).  
130 
See In the Matter of Arleen W. Hughes, supra note 127.
24  conflict— of interest with a client.  As a general matter, the SEC has stated 
that the adviser must disclose all material facts regarding the conflict so that 
the client can make an informed decision whether to enter into or continue 
an advisory relationship with the adviser, or take some action to protect 
himself or herself against the conflict.131 
Disciplinary Events and Precarious Financial Condition.  The SEC requires 
a registered adviser to disclose to clients and prospective clients material 
facts about:  
a. 
a financial condition of the adviser that is reasonably likely to impair 
the adviser’s ability to meet contractual commitments to clients;132 and  
b. 
certain disciplinary events of the adviser (and certain of its officers) 
occurring within the past 10 years, which are presumptively 
material.133  
2. 
Suitable Advice.  Advisers owe their clients a duty to provide only suitable 
investment advice.  This duty generally requires an adviser to make a
material.133  
2. 
Suitable Advice.  Advisers owe their clients a duty to provide only suitable 
investment advice.  This duty generally requires an adviser to make a 
reasonable inquiry into the client’s financial situation, investment experience 
and investment objectives, and to make a reasonable determination that the 
advice is suitable in light of the client’s situation, experience and 
objectives.134   
3. 
Reasonable Basis for Recommendations.  An adviser must have a
131  
Part 2 Adopting Release, supra note 113.  See also SEC v. Capital Gains Research Bureau, supra note 
2, at 191-192 (“The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 thus reflects a congressional recognition of the 
delicate fiduciary nature of an investment advisory relationship, as well as a congressional intent to 
eliminate, or at least to expose, all conflicts of interest which might incline an investment adviser—
consciously or unconsciously—to render advice which was not disinterested.”). 
132  
Item 18 of Part 1A, Form ADV.  This requirement is applicable to advisers that have discretionary 
authority with client accounts, or have custody of client assets, or require or solicit prepayment of more 
than $1,200 in fees per client, six months or more in advance. 
133  
Form ADV:  Item 11 of Part 1A; Item 9 of Part 2A, and Item 3 of Part 2B.  
134 
See Suitability of Investment Advice Provided by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release
133  
Form ADV:  Item 11 of Part 1A; Item 9 of Part 2A, and Item 3 of Part 2B.  
134 
See Suitability of Investment Advice Provided by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release 
No. 1406 (Mar. 16, 1994).  In that release, the SEC proposed a rule under the Act’s anti-fraud 
provisions requiring advisers give clients only suitable advice.  Although the rule was never adopted,  
SEC staff believes that the rule would have codified existing suitability obligations of advisers and, as a 
result, the proposed rule reflects the current obligation of advisers under the Act.  Suitability 
obligations do not apply to impersonal investment advice, and compliance with the obligation is 
evaluated in the context of a client’s overall portfolio.  Id.  “Thus, inclusion of some risky securities in 
the portfolio of a risk-averse client may not necessarily be unsuitable.”  Id.  The SEC has instituted
the portfolio of a risk-averse client may not necessarily be unsuitable.”  Id.  The SEC has instituted 
enforcement actions against advisers that provided unsuitable investment advice.   See In the Matter of 
George E. Brooks & Associates, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1746 (Aug. 17, 1998) 
(adviser failed to appropriately diversify, and effected unsuitable trades of speculative high risk stocks 
in, the discretionary accounts of customers with conservative investment objectives, many of whom 
were elderly and had little investment experience); In the Matter of Philip A. Lehman, Investment 
Advisers Act Release No. 1831 (Sept. 22, 1999) (alleging adviser recommended risky investment for 
customer’s individual retirement account, despite customer’s conservative investment objective and 
age).
25  reasonable, independent basis for its recommendations.135 
4. 
Best Execution.  Where an adviser has responsibility to direct client 
brokerage, it has an obligation to seek best execution of clients’ securities 
transactions.136  In meeting this obligation, an adviser must seek to obtain 
the execution of transactions for clients in such a manner that the client’s 
total cost or proceeds in each transaction is the most favorable under the 
circumstances.137  In assessing whether this standard is met, an adviser 
should consider the full range and quality of a broker’s services when 
placing brokerage, including, among other things, execution capability, 
commission rate, financial responsibility, responsiveness to the adviser, and 
the value of any research provided.138   
Interpositioning.  An adviser will generally not obtain best execution if it 
interposes a broker that does not make a market in the security when it could
the value of any research provided.138   
Interpositioning.  An adviser will generally not obtain best execution if it 
interposes a broker that does not make a market in the security when it could 
have avoided the unnecessary commission payments by dealing directly 
with market makers.139 
Directed Trades.   An adviser is relieved of this obligation when a client 
directs the adviser to use a particular broker.  An adviser may, however, be 
required to make additional disclosure to clients when it receives some 
benefit from the direction of the trade.140
135 
In the Matter of Alfred C. Rizzo, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 897 (Jan 11, 1984) (investment 
adviser lacked a reasonable basis for advice and could not rely on “incredible claims” of issuer); In the 
Matter of Baskin Planning Consultants, Ltd., Investment Advisers Act Release 1297 (Dec. 19, 1991) 
(adviser failed adequately to investigate recommendations to clients).  
136  
In the Matter of Kidder Peabody & Co., Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 232 (Oct. 16, 
1968).  See also rule 206(3)-2(c) (acknowledging adviser’s duty of best execution of client 
transactions). 
137  
This obligation is different from a broker-dealer’s best execution obligation, which typically focuses on 
the price at which an order is executed and does not consider the broker’s compensation, whereas an 
adviser’s duty requires it to consider the total transaction cost to its client.  The SEC has brought
adviser’s duty requires it to consider the total transaction cost to its client.  The SEC has brought 
enforcement actions against advisers alleging failure to seek best execution.  See, e.g., In the Matter of 
Renberg Capital Management, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2064 (Oct 1, 2002); In the 
Matter of Portfolio Advisory Services, LLC, Investment Advisers Act Release. No. 2038 (June 30, 
2002). 
138  
See Interpretive Release Concerning the Scope of Section 28(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
and Related Matters, Exchange Act Release No. 23170 (Apr. 23, 1986) (“1986 Soft Dollar Release”).  
To fulfill this duty, an investment adviser should “periodically and systematically” evaluate the 
execution it is receiving for clients.  Id.  The scope of the duty evolves as changes occur in the market 
that give rise to improved execution, including opportunities to trade at more reasonable prices.  See,
that give rise to improved execution, including opportunities to trade at more reasonable prices.  See, 
e.g., Newton v. Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc., 135 F.3d 266, 270-271 (3d Cir. 1998).  
See also, In the Matter of Jamison, Eaton & Wood, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2129 
(May 15, 2003); In the Matter of Portfolio Advisory Services, LLC, supra note 137. 
139  
In the Matter of Delaware Management Company, Inc., Securities Exchange Act Release No. 8128 
(July 19, 1967).   
140 
See In the Matter of Mark Bailey & Co., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1105 (Feb. 24, 1988) 
(adviser failed to disclose that it did not negotiate commissions on directed trades, and failed to 
disclose that the adviser would be in a better position to negotiate commissions in bunched transactions 
for non-directed trades, and violated anti-fraud provisions of Advisers Act); Jamison, Eaton & Wood, 
Inc., supra note 138.
26  Use of Brokerage Affiliate.  The Act does not prohibit advisers from using 
an affiliated broker to execute client trades.  However, use of an affiliate 
involves a conflict of interest that must be disclosed to client.141  For 
example, use of an affiliated broker may give the adviser incentive to 
“churn” the account. 
Soft Dollars.  Section 28(e) of the Exchange Act provides a safe harbor from 
liability for breach of fiduciary duties when advisers purchase brokerage and 
research products and services with client commission dollars under 
specified circumstances.  In July 2006, the SEC issued a revised 
interpretation as to the scope of the safe harbor.142  
Under section 28(e), an adviser that exercises investment discretion may 
lawfully pay commissions to a broker at rates higher than those offered by 
other brokers, as long as the services provided to the adviser by the broker-
dealer: (i) are limited to “research” or “brokerage;” (ii) constitute lawful and
other brokers, as long as the services provided to the adviser by the broker-
dealer: (i) are limited to “research” or “brokerage;” (ii) constitute lawful and 
appropriate assistance to the adviser in the performance of its investment 
decision-making responsibilities, and (iii) the adviser determines in good 
faith that the commission payments are reasonable in light of the value of 
the brokerage and research services received.   
a. 
Research Services. “Research” services generally include the 
furnishing of advice, analyses, or reports concerning securities, 
portfolio strategy and the performance of accounts, which means the 
research must reflect the expression of reasoning or knowledge 
relating to the statutory subject matter bearing on the investment 
decision-making of the adviser.  The SEC does not believe that 
products or services with “inherently tangible or physical attributes” 
meet this test.  
(i) 
Products or services generally falling within the safe harbor
products or services with “inherently tangible or physical attributes” 
meet this test.  
(i) 
Products or services generally falling within the safe harbor 
include traditional research reports, market data, discussions with 
research analysts, meetings with corporate executives, software 
that provides analysis of securities, and publications (other than 
mass-marketed publications).
141  
Folger Nolan Fleming Douglas Capital Management, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2639 
(Aug. 23, 2007) (adviser entered into agreements with clients to direct trades to affiliated broker 
without disclosing commission rates were twice as high as non-directed trades).  See also Investment 
Advisers Act Release 1092, supra note 3 (if an investment adviser recommends that a client effect 
transactions through its broker-dealer employer, the anti-fraud provisions of the Advisers Act require 
that the adviser make full disclosure of the nature and extent of all adverse interests, including the 
amount of any compensation the advisers will receive from its broker-dealer employer in connection 
such transactions); Don P. Matheson, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 2, 1976) (investment advisers 
that are also broker-dealers or registered representatives have a duty to inform their investment
such transactions); Don P. Matheson, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 2, 1976) (investment advisers 
that are also broker-dealers or registered representatives have a duty to inform their investment 
advisory clients of their ability to seek executions of transactions recommended through other broker-
dealers firms); David P. Atkinson, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 1, 1977). 
142  
Commission Guidance Regarding Client Commission Practices Under Section 28(e) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934, Exchange Act Release No. 34-54165 (July 18, 2006) (“2006 Soft Dollar 
Release”), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2006/34-54165.pdf.  The release superseded 
parts (but not all) of the 1986 Soft Dollar Release.  In particular, the 2006 Soft Dollar Release does not 
replace Section IV of the 1986 Release, which discusses an investment adviser’s disclosure obligations.
27  (ii) 
Products or services not within the safe harbor include computer 
hardware, telephone lines, peripherals; salaries, rent, travel, 
entertainment, and meals; software used for accounting, 
recordkeeping, client reporting, or other administrative functions; 
and marketing seminars and other marketing costs. 
(iii) Where a product or service has uses both inside and outside the 
safe harbor, the SEC believes that an adviser should make a 
reasonable allocation of the cost of the product or service 
according to its use and keep adequate books and records 
concerning allocations so as to be able to make the required good 
faith showing.143 
b. 
Brokerage Services.  “Brokerage” generally includes activities related 
to effecting securities transactions and incidental functions.  According 
to the SEC, brokerage begins when the order is transmitted to the 
broker-dealer and ends when funds or securities are delivered to the 
client account.144   
c.
to the SEC, brokerage begins when the order is transmitted to the 
broker-dealer and ends when funds or securities are delivered to the 
client account.144   
c. 
Commissions.  The SEC interprets the safe harbor of section 28(e) as 
being available for research obtained in relation to commissions on 
agency transactions, and certain riskless principal transactions.145  
d. 
Disclosure Obligations.   Advisers are required to disclose to clients 
any soft dollar arrangements, regardless of whether the arrangements 
fall within the section 28(e) safe harbor.146 Failure to disclose the 
receipt of products or services purchased with client commission 
dollars may constitute a breach of fiduciary duties and/or violation of 
specific provisions of the Advisers Act and other federal laws.147
143  
See id., at Section F, n. 148.   
144  
Id.   
145  
Exchange Act Release No. 45194 (Dec. 27, 2001) (“Release No. 45194”), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/interparchive/interparch2001.shtml.  In Release No. 45194, the SEC 
concluded with respect to riskless principal transactions that “[t]he term ‘commission’ in Section 28(e) 
. . . include[s] a markup, markdown, commission equivalent or other fee paid by a managed account to 
a dealer for executing a transaction where the fee and transaction price are fully and separately 
disclosed on the confirmation and the transaction is reported under conditions that provide independent 
and objective verification of the transaction prices subject to self-regulatory oversight.”  The SEC staff 
had previously interpreted the safe harbor as being available only to agency transactions.  Letter to 
Charles Lerner, Esq., Director of Enforcement, Pension and Welfare Benefit Administration, U.S.
had previously interpreted the safe harbor as being available only to agency transactions.  Letter to 
Charles Lerner, Esq., Director of Enforcement, Pension and Welfare Benefit Administration, U.S. 
Department of Labor, from Richard Ketchum, Director, Division of Market Regulation, SEC (July 25, 
1990).   
146  
Form ADV, the registration form for advisers, requires that advisers disclose soft dollar arrangements.  
See Form ADV, Part 1A, Item 8; Part 2A, Item 12A.1.  See also SEC Inspection Report on the Soft 
Dollar Practices of Broker-Dealers, Investment Advisers and Mutual Funds (Sept. 22, 1998), available 
at http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/softdolr.htm. 
147  
See, e.g., In the Matter of S Squared Technology Corporation, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 
1575 (Aug. 7, 1996) (adviser’s failure to disclose its receipt of benefits in exchange for benefits 
received in exchange for direction of client brokerage violated section 206 of the Act); In the Matter of
received in exchange for direction of client brokerage violated section 206 of the Act); In the Matter of 
Schultze Asset Management, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2633 (Aug. 15, 2007) (adviser
28  5. 
Proxy Voting.  The SEC has stated that an adviser delegated authority to 
vote client proxies has a fiduciary duty to clients to vote the proxies in the 
best interest of its clients and cannot subrogate the client’s interests to its 
own.148 
B. 
Substantive Requirements   
The Act contains other, more specific prohibitions designed to prevent fraud.  In 
addition, the SEC has adopted several anti-fraud rules, which apply to advisers 
registered with the SEC. 
1. 
Client Transactions   
a. 
Principal Transactions.  Section 206(3) of the Act prohibits an adviser, 
acting as principal for its own account, from knowingly selling any 
security to or purchasing any security from a client for its own 
account, without disclosing to the client in writing the capacity in 
which it (or an affiliate149) is acting and obtaining the client’s consent 
before the completion of the transaction.150  The SEC staff has stated 
that notification and consent must be obtained separately for each
before the completion of the transaction.150  The SEC staff has stated 
that notification and consent must be obtained separately for each 
transaction, i.e., a blanket consent for transactions is not sufficient.151
misrepresented to clients that it would restrict its use of soft dollars to cover only those expenses 
covered by section 28(e) when it used them to pay for operating expenses).  
148  
Proxy Voting by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2106 (Jan. 31, 2003), 
available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/ia-2106.htm.  In this release, the SEC adopted rule 206(4)-
6, which requires, among other things, each registered investment adviser that has voting authority over 
client securities to adopt and implement policies and procedures reasonably designed to ensure that 
client securities are voted in the best interest of clients.  The SEC has instituted enforcement action 
against an adviser that failed to disclose to clients its conflicts before voting their shares in a hotly 
contested proxy fight.  In the Matter of Deutsche Asset Management, Inc., Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 2160 (Aug. 19, 2003).  See also Section VI. B. 6 of this outline. 
149
contested proxy fight.  In the Matter of Deutsche Asset Management, Inc., Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 2160 (Aug. 19, 2003).  See also Section VI. B. 6 of this outline. 
149  
The SEC has applied section 206(3) not only to principal transactions engaged in or effected by any 
adviser, but also when an adviser causes a client to enter into a principal transaction that is effected by 
a broker-dealer that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with, the adviser.  
Interpretation of Section 206(3) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 1732 (July 17, 1998)(“Release 1732”), at n.3, available at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/interparchive/interparch1998.shtml.  The SEC has instituted 
enforcement actions when advisers have effected principal transactions through affiliates without 
complying with section 206(3), see, e.g., In the Matter of Calamos Asset Management, Investment
enforcement actions when advisers have effected principal transactions through affiliates without 
complying with section 206(3), see, e.g., In the Matter of Calamos Asset Management, Investment 
Advisers Act Release No. 1589 (Sept. 30, 1996), including “riskless principal” transactions;  In the 
Matter of Rothschild Investment Corporation, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1714 (Apr. 13, 
1998); In the Matter of Concord Investment Co., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1585 (Sept. 27, 
1996).
150 
Section 206(3).  The SEC interprets “completion of the transaction” to mean by settlement of the 
transaction.  Release 1732, supra note 149, available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/ia-1732.htm.  
But the SEC believes that, in order for post-execution, pre-settlement consent to comply with section 
206(3), the adviser must provide both sufficient disclosure for a client to make an informed decision, 
and the opportunity for the client to withhold consent.  Id.  While the notice must be in writing, the 
SEC staff has stated that oral consent is sufficient under the Act.  Dillon, Reed & Co., SEC Staff No-
Action Letter (Aug. 6, 1975). The notice and consent provisions of section 206(3) do not apply if the 
adviser is giving only impersonal advisory services.  Rule 206(3)-1.  
151 
Opinion of Director of Trading and Exchange Division, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 40 (Jan.
adviser is giving only impersonal advisory services.  Rule 206(3)-1.  
151 
Opinion of Director of Trading and Exchange Division, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 40 (Jan. 
5, 1945).  The SEC has instituted enforcement actions against investment advisers for violating section
29  Pooled Investment Vehicles.  The SEC staff has stated that section 
206(3) may apply to client transactions with a pooled investment 
vehicle in which the adviser or its personnel may have interests 
depending on the facts and circumstances, including the extent of the 
interests held by the adviser and its affiliates.152  The SEC staff, 
however, believes that section 206(3) does not apply to a transaction 
between a client account and a pooled investment vehicle of which the 
investment adviser and/or its controlling persons, in the aggregate, own 
25% or less.153 
Statutory Exception.  The restrictions on principal transactions do not 
apply to transactions by a client where the adviser (or an affiliate) is 
also a broker-dealer, but “is not acting as an investment adviser with 
respect to the trade,” e.g., it has not given the advice to buy or sell the 
security.154  
Updated  
Rule 206(3)-3T.  The SEC has adopted a temporary rule, set to expire
respect to the trade,” e.g., it has not given the advice to buy or sell the 
security.154  
Updated  
Rule 206(3)-3T.  The SEC has adopted a temporary rule, set to expire 
on December 31, 2014, that permits advisers that are also registered 
with the SEC as broker-dealers to comply with section 206(3) by 
providing oral (instead of written) notice of principal transactions so 
long as certain conditions are met.155  Specifically, rule 206(3)-3T 
permits an adviser, with respect to a non-discretionary advisory 
account, to comply with section 206(3) of the Act by, among other 
things:  
(i) 
providing written prospective disclosure regarding the conflicts 
arising from principal trades;  
(ii) obtaining written, revocable consent from the client prospectively 
authorizing the adviser to enter into principal transactions; 
(iii) making certain disclosures either orally or in writing and
206(3) when they entered into principal transactions with their clients using only prior blanket 
disclosures and consents.  See In the Matter of Stephens, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 
1666 (Sept. 16, 1997); In the Matter of Clariden Asset Management (New York) Inc., Investment 
Advisers Act Release No. 1504 (July 10, 1995).   
152  
ABA Letter 2005, supra note 103 at II.A.1.  The SEC has instituted enforcement actions based on 
claims of violations of section 206(3) against advisers and their principals when the advisers effected 
transactions between their advisory clients and accounts in which the principals of the advisers held 
significant ownership interests.  See In the Matter of SEC v. Beacon Hill Asset Management, LLC, et 
al., Litigation Release No. 18950 (Oct. 28, 2004); In the Matter of Gintel Asset Management, et al., 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2079 (Nov. 8, 2002). 
153  
Gardner Russo & Gardner, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (June 7, 2006). 
154
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2079 (Nov. 8, 2002). 
153  
Gardner Russo & Gardner, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (June 7, 2006). 
154 
Section 206(3) provides that the section’s “prohibitions…shall not apply to any transaction with a 
customer of a broker or dealer if such broker or dealer is not acting as an investment adviser in relation 
to such transaction.”   
155  
Rule 206(3)-3T.  Temporary Rule Regarding Principal Trades with Certain Advisory Clients, 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2653 (Sep. 24, 2007) (adopting rule 206(3)-3T), available at  
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2007/ia-2653.pdf; Temporary Rule Regarding Principal Trades with 
Certain Advisory Clients, Investment Advisers Act Release 3522 (Dec. 20, 2012) (extending expiration 
date to Dec. 31, 2014), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2012/ia-3522.pdf.
30  obtaining the client’s consent before each principal transaction;  
(iv) sending to the client confirmation statements disclosing the 
capacity in which the adviser has acted and disclosing that the 
adviser informed the client that it may act in a principal capacity 
and that the client authorized the transaction; and  
(v) 
delivering to the client an annual report itemizing the principal 
transactions.  
With certain limited exceptions (for non-convertible investment-grade 
debt securities underwritten by the adviser or a person who controls, is 
controlled by, or is under common control with the adviser (a “control 
person”)), the rule generally is not available for principal trades of 
securities issued or underwritten by the investment adviser or a control 
person of the adviser.156  
Fiduciary Obligations. Compliance with the disclosure and consent 
provisions of section 206(3) or rule 206(3)-3T alone does not satisfy an
person of the adviser.156  
Fiduciary Obligations. Compliance with the disclosure and consent 
provisions of section 206(3) or rule 206(3)-3T alone does not satisfy an 
adviser’s fiduciary obligations with respect to a principal trade.  The 
SEC has expressed the view that section 206(3) must be read together 
with sections 206(1) and (2) of the Act to require that the adviser 
disclose additional facts necessary to alert the client to the adviser’s 
potential conflict of interest in the principal trade.157  
b. 
Agency Cross Transactions.  Section 206(3) also prohibits an adviser 
from knowingly acting as broker for both its advisory client and the 
party on the other side of the transaction without obtaining its client’s 
consent before each transaction.158   
Rule 206(3)-2.  The SEC has adopted a rule permitting these “agency 
cross-transactions” without transaction-by-transaction disclosure if, 
among other things: 
(i)
Rule 206(3)-2.  The SEC has adopted a rule permitting these “agency 
cross-transactions” without transaction-by-transaction disclosure if, 
among other things: 
(i) 
the client has executed a written blanket consent after receiving 
full disclosure of the conflicts involved, which must be renewed 
each year; 
(ii) the adviser provides a written confirmation to the client before 
the completion of each transaction providing, among other
156  
The rule also requires that each account for which the adviser relies on the rule be a brokerage account 
subject to the Exchange Act, and the rules thereunder, and the rules of the self-regulatory 
organization(s) of which it is a member.   
157  
Release 1732, supra note 149.  See also Rocky Mountain Financial Planning, Inc., SEC Staff No-
Action Letter (Feb. 24, 1983) (“While section 206(3) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 requires 
disclosure of such interest and the client’s consent to enter into the transaction with knowledge of such 
interest, the adviser’s fiduciary duties are not discharged merely by such disclosure and consent. The 
adviser must have a reasonable belief that the entry of the client into the transaction is in the client’s 
interest.”). 
158 
Section 206(3).  The SEC staff has expressed the view that the provisions of section 206(3) do not 
apply when the adviser/broker effects the trade without charging a commission or other fee.  Release
apply when the adviser/broker effects the trade without charging a commission or other fee.  Release 
No. 1732, supra note 149.
31  things, the source and amount of any remuneration it received; 
and 
(iii) the disclosure document and each confirmation conspicuously 
disclose that consent may be revoked at any time.159   
c. 
Cross-Trades.  Effecting cross-trades between clients (where a third-
party broker is used) is not specifically addressed by the Act, but is 
subject to the anti-fraud provisions of the Act.160  Cross-trades involve 
potential conflicts of interest (because the adviser could favor one 
client over another), and thus many advisers follow the methodology 
required by a rule under the Investment Company Act when one of the 
clients is an investment company.161  
d. 
Aggregation of Client Orders.  The SEC staff has stated that in 
directing orders for the purchase or sale of securities, an adviser may 
aggregate or “bunch” those orders on behalf of two or more of its 
accounts, so long as the bunching is done for the purpose of achieving
aggregate or “bunch” those orders on behalf of two or more of its 
accounts, so long as the bunching is done for the purpose of achieving 
best execution, and no client is systematically advantaged or 
disadvantaged by the bunching.162   
Advisers that aggregate orders of securities face conflicts when they 
disaggregate the orders to client accounts since, for example, not all 
securities may have been acquired at the same price.  Advisers should 
have procedures in place that are designed to ensure that the trades are 
allocated in such a manner that all clients are treated fairly and 
equitably.163  For example, advisers can allocate orders based on a pro 
rata, rotational, or random basis.
159 
Rule 206(3)-2.  The rule does not apply to a transaction when the adviser has discretionary authority to 
act for the purchaser and seller.  Paragraph (c) of the rule admonishes advisers that the rule does not 
relieve them of the duty to act in the best interests of their clients, including the duty to obtain best 
price and execution for any transaction.   See Agency Cross Transactions for Advisory Clients, 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 589 (May 31, 1977) (adopting rule 206(3)-2). 
160  
See In the Matter of Renberg Capital Management, Inc. and Daniel H. Renberg, Investment Advisers 
Act Release No. 2064 (Oct. 1, 2002).   
161 
Rule 17a-7.   Merely following the procedures set forth in rule 17a-7 may not satisfy an adviser’s 
fiduciary obligations to clients.  The staff has explained that it must be in the interest of both clients to 
enter into a cross trade and thus, for example, an adviser should not cause a client to enter into a cross-
enter into a cross trade and thus, for example, an adviser should not cause a client to enter into a cross-
trade if it could obtain a better price in the markets.  Federated Municipal Funds, SEC No-Action 
Letter (Nov. 20, 2006).  
162  
Pretzel & Stouffer, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 1, 1995). 
163  
The SEC has instituted numerous enforcement actions against advisers that unfairly allocated client 
trades without making adequate disclosure.  See In the Matter of John McStay Investment Counsel, L.P, 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2153 (July 31, 2003) (adviser failed to disclose change in its 
method of allocating initial public offerings among accounts to a method that favored mutual fund 
account); In the Matter of McKenzie Walker Investment Management, Inc., et al., Investment Advisers 
Act Release No. 1571 (1996) (adviser allocated profitable trades to accounts charged a performance-
Act Release No. 1571 (1996) (adviser allocated profitable trades to accounts charged a performance-
based fee); In the Matter of Nicholas-Applegate Capital Management, Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 1741 (Aug. 12, 1998) (adviser failed to supervise trader who allocated profitable trades to 
own personal account);  In the Matter of Ark Asset Management Co., Inc., Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 2962 (Dec. 14, 2009) (adviser allocated profitable trades to the proprietary hedge fund 
accounts at the expense of the client accounts without disclosing this practice).
32  2. 
Advertising.  The anti-fraud provisions of the Act apply with respect to both 
clients and prospective clients.  The SEC has adopted rule 206(4)-1, which 
prohibits any adviser registered with the SEC from using any advertisement 
that contains any untrue statement of material fact or is otherwise 
misleading.164   
Specific Restrictions.  An advertisement may not: 
a. 
use or refer to testimonials, which staff views as including any 
statement of a client’s experience with, or endorsement of, an 
adviser;165 
b. 
refer to past specific recommendations made by the adviser, unless the 
advertisement sets out a list of all recommendations made by the 
adviser during the preceding year; 
c. 
represents that any graph, chart, or formula can, in and of itself, be 
used to determine which securities to buy or sell; and 
d. 
refer to any report, analysis, or service as free, unless it really is. 
Performance Advertising.  Advertisements containing information about the
d. 
refer to any report, analysis, or service as free, unless it really is. 
Performance Advertising.  Advertisements containing information about the 
performance of client accounts must not be misleading.  The SEC staff 
considers an advertisement containing performance information misleading 
if it implies, or if a reader would infer from it, something about an adviser’s 
competence or possible future investment results that would be unwarranted 
if the reader knew all of the facts.166 Advisers registered with the SEC must 
maintain records substantiating any performance claimed in an 
advertisement.167
Definition of Advertisement.  While no communications to clients may be 
misleading, the specific restrictions discussed above apply only to 
“advertisements” by advisers, which the SEC defines generally as 
communications (in writing or electronic form) to more than one person that 
offer advisory services.168  The SEC staff does not believe that a written
164 
Rule 206(4)-1.  See also SEC v. C.R. Richmond & Co., 565 F.2d 1101, 1104 (9th Cir. 1977) (an 
adviser’s advertising “must be measured from the viewpoint of a person unskilled and unsophisticated 
in investment matters”); In the Matter of Jesse Rosenblum, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 913 
(May 17, 1984) (an investment adviser’s advertisement that contained materially misleading statements 
was “not cured by the disclaimers buried in the [smaller print] text [of the advertisement]”). 
165  
For further discussion, see DALBAR, Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Mar. 24, 1997). 
166 
Edward F. O’Keefe, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Apr. 13, 1978); Anametrics Investment Management, 
SEC Staff No-Action Letter (May 5, 1977).  See also Clover Capital Management, Inc., SEC Staff No-
Action Letter (Oct. 28, 1986).  
167 
Rule 204-2(a)(16).  See In the Matter of Warwick Capital Management, Inc., Initial Decision Release
Action Letter (Oct. 28, 1986).  
167 
Rule 204-2(a)(16).  See In the Matter of Warwick Capital Management, Inc., Initial Decision Release 
No. 327 (Feb. 15, 2007). (“Respondent blamed a series of dubious calamities for their inability to 
produce records that would support the inflated numbers and created after-the-fact documents 
concerning the inflated numbers.”). 
168  
Rule 206(4)-1(b) defines advertisement for purposes of the rule as “[a]ny notice circular, letter or other 
written communication addressed to more than one person, or any notice or other announcement in any 
publication or by radio or television, which offers (1) any analysis, report or publication concerning 
securities, or (2) any graph, chart, formula or other device to be used in making any determination as to
33  communication by an adviser that does no more than respond to an 
unsolicited request by a client is an advertisement even if it received 
multiple requests for the same information, e.g., in multiple RFPs.169  
Use of Social Media.  Use of social media to communicate with clients and 
prospective clients may implicate rule 206(4)-1.170 
3. 
Custody of Client Assets.  A registered adviser with custody of client funds 
or securities (“client assets”) is required by rule 206(4)-2 to take a number of 
steps designed to safeguard those client assets.171  These requirements were 
amended in December 2009.172 
a. 
Definition of Custody.  Custody means “holding, directly or indirectly, 
client funds or securities, or having any authority to obtain possession 
of them.”  An adviser has custody if an affiliate has custody of its 
client funds or securities in connection with advisory services it 
provides to clients. 
Custody includes: 
(i) 
Possession of client funds or securities; 
(ii)
client funds or securities in connection with advisory services it 
provides to clients. 
Custody includes: 
(i) 
Possession of client funds or securities; 
(ii) 
Any arrangement under which an adviser is permitted or 
authorized to withdraw client funds or securities (such as check-
writing authority or the ability to deduct fees from client assets), 
and  
(iii) Any capacity that gives an adviser or its supervised person legal 
ownership of or access to client funds or securities (such as 
acting as general partner or trustee of a pooled investment 
vehicle).173  
b. 
Qualified Custodians.  An adviser with custody must maintain client 
funds and securities with “qualified custodians” either under the 
client’s name or under the adviser’s name as agent or trustee for its 
clients.  Qualified custodians are:
when to buy or sell any security, or which security to buy or sell, or (3) any other investment advisory 
service with regard to securities.”  A communication covered by the rule may be made to new clients or 
to existing clients where the purpose is to induce them to renew their advisory contract or subscription.  
Spear & Staff, 42 S.E.C. 549 (1965). 
169  
Investment Counsel Association of America, SEC Staff Letter (Mar. 1, 2004).  
170  
The SEC staff has made observations regarding advisers’ use of social media.  Investment Adviser Use 
of Social Media, National Examination Risk Alert, Vol. II, Issue 1 (Jan. 4, 2012), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/about/offices/ocie/riskalert-socialmedia.pdf. 
171  
Rule 206(4)-2.  The staff of the SEC’s Division of Investment Management has published responses to 
“FAQs” (frequently asked questions) on the custody rule (“Custody Rule FAQs”), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/custody_faq_030510.htm. 
172
“FAQs” (frequently asked questions) on the custody rule (“Custody Rule FAQs”), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/custody_faq_030510.htm. 
172  
See Custody of Funds or Securities of Clients by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release 
No. 2968 (Dec. 30, 2009) (“Release 2968”), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2009/ia-
2968.pdf. 
173  
Rule 206(4)-2(d)(2).
34  (i) 
broker-dealers, banks, savings associations, futures commission 
merchants, and 
(ii) 
non-U.S. financial institutions that customarily hold financial 
assets for their customers, if the institutions keep the advisory 
assets separate from their own. 
c. 
Quarterly Account Statements.  The adviser must have a reasonable 
basis, after due inquiry, for believing that the qualified custodian sends 
quarterly account statements directly to the client.174  
d. 
Notification.  The adviser must notify the client as to where and how 
the funds or securities will be maintained, promptly after opening an 
account for the client and following any changes to this information.175  
If the adviser also sends its own account statements to clients, this 
notice and subsequent account statements from the adviser must 
contain a statement urging the client to compare account statements 
from the custodian with those from the adviser.176 
e.
notice and subsequent account statements from the adviser must 
contain a statement urging the client to compare account statements 
from the custodian with those from the adviser.176 
e. 
Surprise Examinations.  An adviser that has custody of client assets 
generally must undergo an annual surprise examination by an 
independent public accountant to verify the client’s funds and 
securities.177  One exception from this requirement is if it has custody 
solely because it has authority to deduct advisory fees directly from 
client accounts.178 
Updated 
f. 
Pooled Investment Vehicles.  If the adviser is the general partner of a 
limited partnership (or holds a similar position with another form of 
pooled investment vehicle such as a hedge fund)179: 
(i) 
the adviser is deemed to have complied with the annual surprise 
examination requirement and need not form a reasonable belief 
regarding delivery of account statements if the pool’s financial 
statements are audited by an independent public accountant that 
is registered with, and subject to regular inspection by, the Public
174  
A common method of forming a reasonable belief acceptable to the SEC is receipt of a copy of an 
account statement sent to the client.  Release No. 2968, supra note 172.  
175  
Notice need not be given if the client opens the account himself. 
176  
Rule 206(4)-2(a)(2). 
177  
The timing of exams must be irregular from year to year.  Rule 206(4)-2(a)(4).  See also, In the Matter 
of Kaufman, Bernstein, et al., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2194 (Nov. 20, 2003) (independent 
auditor began examination the same date each year).  The accountant conducting the examination must 
file a certificate on Form ADV-E within 120 days of the time chosen by the accountant for the 
examination.  Rule 206(4)-2(a)(4)(i).  The SEC has issued guidance for accountants performing an 
examination pursuant to this rule.  See Commission Guidance Regarding Independent Public 
Accountant Engagements Performed Pursuant to Rule 206(4)-2 Under the Investment Advisers Act of
examination pursuant to this rule.  See Commission Guidance Regarding Independent Public 
Accountant Engagements Performed Pursuant to Rule 206(4)-2 Under the Investment Advisers Act of 
1940, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2969 (Dec. 30, 2009). 
178  
Rule 206(4)-2(b)(3). 
179  
The SEC staff takes the position that a state-created 529 plan may be treated as a pooled investment 
vehicle for these purposes.  See Investment Company Institute, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Sept. 5, 
2012).
35  Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”),180 and the 
audited statements are distributed to the pool’s investors;181 or 
(ii) 
the qualified custodian must send quarterly account statements to 
each investor in the pool and the adviser must obtain a surprise 
examination of the pool’s assets.182 
g. 
Adviser or “Related Person” as Custodian.183  If the adviser or its 
related person maintains client assets as the qualified custodian in 
connection with the adviser’s advisory services, the adviser must: 
(i) 
have an independent public accountant that is registered with, 
and subject to regular inspection by, the PCAOB perform the 
required annual surprise examination, unless the related person is 
“operationally independent” of the adviser;184 and 
(ii) 
obtain, or receive from the affiliate, an annual report of the 
internal controls relating to the custody of client assets prepared 
by an independent public accountant that is registered with, and
obtain, or receive from the affiliate, an annual report of the 
internal controls relating to the custody of client assets prepared 
by an independent public accountant that is registered with, and 
subject to regular inspection by, the PCAOB.185 
4. 
Use of Solicitors.  An adviser generally is prohibited by rule 206(4)-3 from 
paying a cash fee, directly or indirectly, to a third party (a “solicitor”) unless 
it meets the requirements of the rule:  
a. 
Registered.  The adviser must be registered under the Act. 
b. 
Not Disqualified.  An adviser may not pay solicitation fees to a 
solicitor that would itself be subject to Statutory Disqualification as an 
investment adviser.186
180  
The audited financial statements must be prepared according to, or reconciled to, U.S. GAAP.
181  
The audited financial statements must be distributed to investors within 120 days after the close of the 
pool’s fiscal year.  In 2006, the Division of Investment Management issued a letter indicating that it 
would not recommend enforcement action to the Commission under section 206(4) of the Act or rule 
206(4)-2 against an adviser of a “fund of funds” relying on the annual audit provision of rule 206(4)-2 
if the audited financial statements of the fund of funds are distributed to investors in the fund of funds 
within 180 days of the end of its fiscal year.  See ABA Committee on Private Investment Entities, SEC 
Staff Letter (Aug. 10, 2006); Release 2968, supra note 172, at n. 45.  See also Custody Rule FAQs, 
supra note 171. 
182  
Rule 206(4)-2(a)(5) and (a)(4). 
183  
A “related person” includes any person, directly or indirectly, controlling or controlled by the adviser, 
and any person that is under common control. 
184
Rule 206(4)-2(a)(5) and (a)(4). 
183  
A “related person” includes any person, directly or indirectly, controlling or controlled by the adviser, 
and any person that is under common control. 
184  
The surprise examination is not required of the adviser if it can demonstrate that the related person 
acting as qualified custodian is operationally independent.  This determination is made by examining 
the relationship between the adviser and the related person, including whether there are common 
employees, shared premises, and common supervision.  See rule 206(4)-2(d)(5). 
185  
Rule 206(4)-2(a)(6). 
186  
See supra notes 106-108 and accompanying text.  Through a series of no-action letters, however, the 
SEC staff  expressed the view that statutorily disqualified persons may act as solicitors if the 
disqualifying conduct is disclosed in a separate written document to be given to each solicited person
disqualifying conduct is disclosed in a separate written document to be given to each solicited person 
(i) at least 48 hours before such solicited person enters into an advisory contract, or (ii) at the time the
36  c. 
Written Agreement.  The solicitation fee must be paid pursuant to a 
written agreement that:  
(i) 
describes the solicitation activities and the compensation to be 
paid; 
(ii) 
contains an undertaking by the solicitor to perform his duties 
according to the agreement and in compliance with the Act; and 
(iii) requires the solicitor to provide a prospective client a copy of: 
(A) the adviser’s disclosure statement (brochure), and  
(B) a separate disclosure statement describing the terms of the 
solicitation arrangement, including that the solicitor is being 
compensated by the adviser.187 
Solicitors.  The rule defines a solicitor as anyone who, directly or indirectly, 
solicits any client for, or refers any client to, an investment adviser.  The 
Commission believes that a solicitor would be a “person associated with an 
adviser” under the Act.  The adviser has an obligation to supervise the 
activities of solicitors.188
Commission believes that a solicitor would be a “person associated with an 
adviser” under the Act.  The adviser has an obligation to supervise the 
activities of solicitors.188 
Client Referrals.  Rule 206(4)-3 does not apply to the direction of brokerage 
in return for client referrals.  But the adviser directing brokerage to brokers 
referring clients to it has a significant conflict of interest.  Accordingly, an 
adviser may be obligated to disclose to clients material information 
regarding conflicts arising from the arrangement, including any affect on the 
adviser’s ability to obtain best execution.189   
Pooled Investment Vehicles.  The SEC staff has stated that the rule does not 
apply to payments by an adviser to solicit investments in a pooled 
investment vehicle sponsored by the adviser.190
solicited person enters into the advisory contract, if the solicited person has the right to terminate the 
advisory contract within five days.  Accordingly, the staff no longer issues no-action letters of this type, 
except if the facts raise novel or unusual circumstances.  See Dougherty & Company LLC, SEC Staff 
No-Action Letter (July 3, 2003).   
187  
If the solicitor is an employee of the adviser, however, the solicitor is not required to provide 
prospective clients a copy of the adviser’s brochure or the separate disclosure statement.   
188 
For discussion of an adviser’s obligation to supervise cash solicitors acting on its behalf, see 
Requirements Governing Payments of Cash Referral Fees by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers 
Act Release No. 615 (Feb. 2, 1978) (proposing release); Requirements Governing Payments of Cash 
Referral Fees by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 688 (July 12, 1979) 
(adopting release). 
189
Referral Fees by Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 688 (July 12, 1979) 
(adopting release). 
189  
In the Matter of Jamison, Eaton and Wood, Inc., supra note 138; In the Matter of Portfolio Advisory 
Services LLC, supra note 137; In the Matter of Founders Asset Management, Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 1953 (July 20, 2001); In the Matter of Fleet Investment Advisers, Inc. (successor to 
Shawmut Investment Advisers, Inc.), Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1821 (Sept. 9, 1999).  
190  
Mayer Brown, LLP, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (July 15, 2008).  In its response, however, the staff 
noted that the solicitor may itself be an adviser subject to the antifraud provisions of the Act.  The 
staff’s response was amended on July 28, 2008 but indicates that the response letter should be deemed
37  5. 
Pay to Play Rule.  On July 1, 2010, the Commission adopted rule 206(4)-5 
to address so-called "pay to play" practices in which investment advisers 
make campaign contributions to elected officials of state or municipal 
governments in order to influence the award of contracts to manage public 
pension plan assets and other government investment accounts.191  The rule 
applies to SEC-registered investment advisers, certain exempt reporting 
advisers, and foreign private advisers, who provide investment advisory 
services, or are seeking to provide investment advisory services, to state and 
municipal government entities.192
a. 
Prohibitions.  The rule contains three main prohibitions:  
(i) 
Two-Year Time Out.  An investment adviser is prohibited from 
receiving compensation for providing advice to a government 
entity, either directly or through a “covered investment pool”, 
within two years after a contribution by the adviser, or by any of 
its “covered associates” (which include the adviser’s general 
partner or managing member, executive officers or other 
individuals with a similar status or function, solicitors, and 
political action committees they control) to an official of that 
government entity who can influence the award of advisory 
business.193   
(ii) Third Party Solicitor Ban.   Neither an investment adviser nor 
any of its covered associates may provide or agree to provide, 
directly or indirectly, payment to any third party to solicit 
government clients for the adviser unless such person is a 
“regulated person.”194
to have been issued on July 15.  See also rule 206(4)-5 and Section VI. B. 5 of this outline regarding 
solicitation of government clients. 
191  
Political Contributions by Certain Investment Advisers, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3043 
(July 1, 2010)(“Pay to Play Release”), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2010/ia-3043.pdf.   
For staff responses to frequently asked questions about the rule, visit the SEC’s website at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/pay-to-play-faq.htm. 
192  
Rule 206(4)-5(a). 
193  
Rule 206(4)-5(a)(1).  An adviser subject to the rule is not prohibited from providing advisory services 
to a government client, even after triggering the two-year time out.  Instead, an adviser is prohibited 
from receiving compensation for providing advisory services to such client during the time out.  This 
enables an adviser to act consistently with its fiduciary obligations and provide uncompensated
from receiving compensation for providing advisory services to such client during the time out.  This 
enables an adviser to act consistently with its fiduciary obligations and provide uncompensated 
advisory services for a reasonable period of time to allow the government client to replace the adviser.  
See also Section VI. B. 4 regarding the cash solicitation rule that applies to all SEC-registered advisers. 
194  
Rule 206(4)-5(a)(2)(i).  “Regulated persons” include (i) SEC-registered investment advisers that have 
not, and whose covered associates have not, within two years of soliciting a government entity, made a 
contribution to an official of that government entity; or bundled any contribution to an official or 
payment to a political party of a state or locality where the adviser is providing or seeking to provide 
investment advisory services to a government entity; (ii) registered broker-dealers that are subject to a
investment advisory services to a government entity; (ii) registered broker-dealers that are subject to a 
pay to play rule adopted by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority that the Commission, by order, 
finds substantially equivalent or more stringent than rule 206(4)-5; and (iii) a “municipal adviser” 
registered with the Commission and subject to rules adopted by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking 
Board that the Commission, by order, finds substantially equivalent or more stringent than rule 206(4)-
38  (iii) Bundling Ban.  Rule 206(4)-5 prohibits an adviser and its 
covered associates from “bundling” others’ contributions -- i.e. 
coordinating or soliciting any person or political action 
committee to make (A) any contribution to an official of a 
government entity to which the adviser is providing or seeking to 
provide investment advisory services; or (B) any payment to a 
political party of a state or locality where the investment adviser 
is providing or seeking to provide investment advisory services 
to a government entity.195   
b. 
Catch-All Provision.  Rule 206(4)-5(d) prohibits acts done indirectly, 
which, if done directly, would violate the rule. 
c. 
Covered Investment Pools.  Rule 206(4)-5 includes a provision that 
applies each of the prohibitions of the rule to an adviser that manages 
assets of a government entity through a “covered investment pool” 
defined as (i) any investment company registered under the Investment
assets of a government entity through a “covered investment pool” 
defined as (i) any investment company registered under the Investment 
Company Act that is an investment option of a plan or program of a 
government entity;196 or (ii) any company that would be an investment 
company under section 3(a) of the Investment Company Act but for 
the exclusions from that definition provided by section 3(c)(1), section 
3(c)(7) or section 3(c)(11) of that Act.197  
d. 
Recordkeeping.  Rule 204-2 was amended to require registered 
advisers that provide investment advisory services to a government 
entity, or to a covered investment pool in which a government entity is 
an investor, to make and keep certain records related to the pay to play 
rule. 
6. 
Proxy Voting.  A registered adviser that exercises voting authority over 
client securities is required to vote them in the best interest of the client and 
not in its own interest.  Rule 206(4)-6 requires advisers with voting authority
client securities is required to vote them in the best interest of the client and 
not in its own interest.  Rule 206(4)-6 requires advisers with voting authority 
over client securities to: 
a. 
adopt and implement written policies and procedures that are 
reasonably designed to ensure that the adviser votes in the clients’ best 
interests, and which must specifically address conflicts of interest that 
may arise between the adviser and its clients; 
b. 
describe their voting policies and procedures to clients, deliver a copy 
of the policies and procedures to clients upon request, and inform 
clients how they can obtain information on how the adviser voted their 
securities; and
5. This prohibition is limited to third-party solicitors.  Thus, the prohibition does not apply to any of the 
adviser’s employees, general partners, managing members, or executive. 
195  
Rule 206(4)-5(a)(2)(ii).  
196  
A plan or a program of a government entity includes participant-directed plans, such as college savings 
plans like 529 plans and retirement plans like 403(b) and 457 plans. 
197  
Rule 206(4)-5(f)(3).
39  c. 
keep certain records relating to voting of client securities.198 
7. 
Supervision.  An adviser has a continuing responsibility to supervise all 
persons acting on its behalf.199  The SEC may sanction an adviser that “has 
failed reasonably to supervise, with a view to preventing violations of the 
provisions of such statutes, rules, and regulations, another person who 
commits such a violation, if such other person is subject to his 
supervision.”200  
a. 
Supervisor.  Whether a person has responsibility as a “supervisor” 
depends on whether, under the facts and circumstances of a particular 
case, the person has a requisite degree of responsibility, ability or 
authority to affect the conduct of the employee whose behavior is at 
issue.201 
b. 
Safe Harbor.  Under the Act, a person (e.g., an adviser or an officer of 
the adviser) will not be deemed to have failed to supervise a person if 
(i) the adviser had established procedures and a system for applying
the adviser) will not be deemed to have failed to supervise a person if 
(i) the adviser had established procedures and a system for applying 
such procedures that are reasonably expected to prevent and detect the 
conduct, and (ii) the person reasonably discharged his supervisory 
duties and had no reasonable cause to believe that the procedures were 
not being complied with.202   
8. 
Compliance Program.  Under rule 206(4)-7 each registered adviser must 
establish an internal compliance program that addresses the adviser’s 
performance of its fiduciary and substantive obligations under the Act. 
a. 
Chief Compliance Officer.  Each adviser must designate a chief
198  
See also Section VI. A. 5 of this outline.   
199 
The SEC has stated that the “delicate fiduciary relationship” between an investment adviser and a client 
imposes an obligation on an adviser to review and to monitor its activities and the activities of its 
employees.  Shearson Lehman Brothers, Inc. and Stein Roe & Farnham, Exchange Act Release No. 
23640 (Sept. 24, 1986).  The Commission has repeatedly emphasized that the duty to supervise is a 
critical component of the federal regulatory scheme.  See In re Rhumbline Advisers, Investment 
Advisers Act Release. No. 1765 (Sept. 29, 1998); In re Scudder Kemper Investments, Inc., Investment 
Advisers Act Release. No. 1848 (Dec. 22, 1999) (adviser failed reasonably to supervise employee and 
did not have policies and procedures designed to detect and prevent employees’ unauthorized trading in 
client accounts); In re Nicholas-Applegate Capital Management, Investment Advisers Act Release. No.
client accounts); In re Nicholas-Applegate Capital Management, Investment Advisers Act Release. No. 
1741 (Aug. 12, 1998) (adviser failed reasonably to supervise employee and did not have policies and 
procedures designed to detect and prevent employees from engaging in improper personal trading); In 
re Van Kampen American Capital Asset Management, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release. No. 
1525 (Sep. 29, 1995) (adviser failed reasonably to supervise employee and did not have policies and 
procedures designed to detect and prevent employees from mispricing fund securities).  Both registered 
and unregistered advisers have an obligation to supervise persons acting on their behalf.  In the Matter 
of Wilfred Mickel and Robert A. Littell, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2203 (Dec. 15, 2003).  
See also In the Matter of Western Asset Management Co. and Legg Mason Fund Adviser, Inc., 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1980 (Sept. 28, 2001) (adviser has a duty to supervise a sub-
See also In the Matter of Western Asset Management Co. and Legg Mason Fund Adviser, Inc., 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1980 (Sept. 28, 2001) (adviser has a duty to supervise a sub-
adviser); TBA Financial Corporation, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Nov. 7, 1983) (duty to supervise 
employees who are also “registered representatives”).   
200  
Section 203(e)(6).  201  
See In re John H. Gutfreund, 51 S.E.C. 93, 113 (1992).  
202  
Section 203(e)(6).
40  compliance officer (“CCO”).203  The CCO must be knowledgeable 
about the Act and have the authority to develop and enforce 
appropriate compliance policies and procedures for the adviser.  The 
CCO need not be an employee who does not have other duties.204   
b. 
Policies and Procedures.  Each adviser must also adopt and implement 
written policies and procedures reasonably designed to prevent the 
adviser or its personnel from violating the Act.205  The SEC explained 
that each adviser, in designing its policies and procedures, should 
identify conflicts and other compliance factors creating risk exposure 
for the firm and its clients in light of the firm's particular operations, 
and then design policies and procedures that address those risks.206 
The SEC has stated that these policies and procedures should cover, at 
a minimum, the following areas to the extent applicable to the adviser: 
(i) 
Portfolio management processes, including allocation of
a minimum, the following areas to the extent applicable to the adviser: 
(i) 
Portfolio management processes, including allocation of 
investment opportunities among clients and consistency of 
portfolios with clients' investment objectives, disclosures by the 
adviser, and applicable regulatory restrictions;  
(ii) Trading practices, including procedures by which the adviser 
satisfies its best execution obligation, uses client brokerage to 
obtain research and other services (“soft dollar arrangements”), 
and allocates aggregated trades among clients; 
(iii) Proprietary trading of the adviser and personal trading activities 
of supervised persons;
203  
Rule 206(4)-7(c).   The Commission has stated that having the title of chief compliance officer does 
not, in and of itself, carry supervisory responsibilities so that an adviser’s chief compliance officer 
would not necessarily be subject to a sanction for failure to supervise other advisory personnel.  
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2204 (Dec. 17, 2003) (“Release 2204”) at n. 73 available at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/finalarchive/finalarchive2003.shtml.   
204  
Release 2204, supra note 203 at Section II. C.  However, the SEC recently settled an enforcement 
action alleging that a dually-registered broker-dealer and investment adviser violated section 206(4) of 
the Advisers Act and rule 206(4)-7 thereunder by failing to adopt and implement compliance policies 
and procedures specific to its advisory business when its CCO spent about 95% of his time on 
compliance-related issues for the firm’s brokerage business and only about 5% of his time on
and procedures specific to its advisory business when its CCO spent about 95% of his time on 
compliance-related issues for the firm’s brokerage business and only about 5% of his time on 
compliance-related issues for the advisory business. In the Matter of Feltl & Company, Inc., 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3325 (Nov. 28, 2011). 
205 
Rule 206(4)-7(a).  The SEC has brought enforcement actions against advisers for failing to adopt and 
implement adequate policies and procedures as required by rule 206(4)-7. See, e.g., In the Matter of 
OMNI Investment Advisors Inc. and Gary R. Beynon, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3323 (Nov. 
28, 2011); In the Matter of The Buckingham Research Group, Inc., Buckingham Capital Management, 
Inc., and Lloyd R. Karp, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3109 (Nov. 17, 2010); In the Matter of 
Consulting Services Group, LLC, and Joe D. Meals, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2669 (Oct. 
4, 2007).   
206
Consulting Services Group, LLC, and Joe D. Meals, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2669 (Oct. 
4, 2007).   
206  
The SEC has settled an enforcement action against an adviser that adopted a “pre-packaged” policies 
and procedures manual that failed to reflect the risk factors or conflicts of interest of the adviser; the 
SEC found that the adviser violated rule 206(4)-7 by failing to adopt and implement written policies 
and procedures reasonably designed to prevent violations of the Advisers Act by that adviser’s 
supervised persons.  In the Matter of Consulting Services Group, LLC, and Joe D. Meals, supra note 
205.
41  (iv) The accuracy of disclosures made to investors, clients, and 
regulators, including account statements and advertisements; 
(v) 
Safeguarding of client assets from conversion or inappropriate 
use by advisory personnel; 
(vi) The accurate creation of required records and their maintenance 
in a manner that secures them from unauthorized alteration or use 
and protects them from untimely destruction; 
(vii) Marketing advisory services, including the use of solicitors;  
(viii) Processes to value client holdings and assess fees based on those 
valuations; 
(ix) Safeguards for the privacy protection of client records and 
information; and 
(x) 
Business continuity plans.207  
c. 
Annual Review.  The adviser must review the adequacy and 
effectiveness of its policies at least annually.208  
9. 
Code of Ethics.  All advisers registered with the SEC must adopt and enforce 
a written code of ethics reflecting the adviser’s fiduciary duties to its
9. 
Code of Ethics.  All advisers registered with the SEC must adopt and enforce 
a written code of ethics reflecting the adviser’s fiduciary duties to its 
clients.209  At a minimum, the adviser’s code of ethics must: 
a. 
Standards of Conduct.  Set forth a minimum standard of conduct for 
all supervised persons; 
b. 
Compliance with Federal Securities Laws.  Require supervised persons 
to comply with federal securities laws; 
c. 
Personal Securities Transactions.  Require each of an adviser’s access 
persons210 to report his securities holdings at the time that the person 
becomes an access person and at least once annually thereafter and to 
make a report at least once quarterly of all personal securities 
transactions in reportable securities to the adviser’s CCO or other 
designated person;211
207  
Release 2204, supra note 203. 
208  
Rule 206(4)-7(b). 
209  
Rule 204A-1.  See also, In the Matter of Consulting Services Group, LLC, and Joe D. Meals, supra 
note 205 (adviser failed to timely adopt and accurately document ethics code). 
210  
Rule 204A-1(e)(1) defines “access person.”  Generally, an access person is a supervised person who 
has access to non-public information regarding clients’ securities purchase or sale of securities. 
211  
Rule 204A-1(b) (1) (holdings reports), and (2) (transaction reports).  Access persons do not have to 
report holdings of or transactions in: (i) direct obligations in of the U.S. government; (ii) certain bank 
instruments, commercial paper, and agreements; (iii) shares of money market funds; (iv) shares in 
open-end investment companies (mutual funds) that are not advised by either the adviser or an entity in 
a control relationship with the adviser); and (v) shares of a (US) unit investment trust that invests
a control relationship with the adviser); and (v) shares of a (US) unit investment trust that invests 
exclusively in an unaffiliated mutual fund.  See rule 204A-1(j).  See also, M&G Investment
42  d. 
Pre-approval of Certain Securities Transactions.  Require the CCO or 
other designated persons to pre-approve investments by the access 
persons in IPOs or limited offerings; 
e. 
Reporting Violations.  Require all supervised persons to promptly 
report any violations of the code to the adviser’s CCO or other 
designated person; 
f. 
Distribution and Acknowledgment.  Require the adviser to provide 
each supervised person with a copy of the code, and any amendments, 
and to obtain a written acknowledgment from each supervised person 
of his receipt of a copy of the code; and 
g. 
Recordkeeping.  Require the adviser to keep copies of the code, 
records of violations of the code and of any actions taken against 
violators of the code, and copies of each supervised person’s 
acknowledgement of receipt of a copy of the code. 
10. Fraud Against Investors in Pooled Investment Vehicles.  Rule 206(4)-8 
prohibits advisers from defrauding investors and prospective investors in
10. Fraud Against Investors in Pooled Investment Vehicles.  Rule 206(4)-8 
prohibits advisers from defrauding investors and prospective investors in 
pooled investment vehicles they advise.212  The anti-fraud provisions of the 
Act (section 206(1) and (2)) prohibit advisers from defrauding “clients.”  A 
2006 court decision created doubt about whether an investor in a pooled 
investment vehicle (e.g., a hedge fund) advised by an adviser is a “client,” 
and thus whether the SEC could enforce these provisions against an adviser 
that defrauds the investors, but not the fund.213 
a. 
Prohibition on False or Misleading Statements.  Rule 206(4)-8 
prohibits advisers to pooled investment vehicles from making any 
materially false or misleading statements to investors or prospective 
investors in those pools.  
b. 
Prohibition of Other Frauds.  In addition, the rule prohibits advisers to 
pooled investment vehicles from otherwise defrauding the investors or
investors in those pools.  
b. 
Prohibition of Other Frauds.  In addition, the rule prohibits advisers to 
pooled investment vehicles from otherwise defrauding the investors or 
prospective investors in those pools.  This provision is designed to 
apply more broadly to fraudulent conduct that may not involve 
statements.
Management Ltd., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Mar. 1, 2007) (permitting access persons of U.K.-
based registered adviser to exclude from reports certain analogous instruments). 
212  
Rule 206(4)-8.  See Prohibition of Fraud by Advisers to Certain Pooled Investment Vehicles, 
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2628 (Aug. 3, 2007), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2007/ia-2628.pdf.  See  also, SEC v. Rabinovich & Associates, LP, Alex 
Rabinovich and Joseph Lovaglio, 07 Civ. 10547(GEL) (S.D.N.Y.) (Nov. 17, 2008); SEC v. Moises 
Pacheco, et al., Civil Action No. 09-CV-1355-W-RBB (Nov. 19, 2009) (discussed in In the Matter of 
Moises Pacheco, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2960 (Dec. 11, 2009)); SEC v. Thomas J. 
Petters, et al, Civil Action No. 09 SC 1750 ADM/JSM (D. Minn.) (Oct. 5, 2010) (discussed in SEC v. 
Thomas J. Petters, et al,  Litigation Release No. 21687 (Oct. 18, 2010)); SEC v. Donald Anthony
Petters, et al, Civil Action No. 09 SC 1750 ADM/JSM (D. Minn.) (Oct. 5, 2010) (discussed in SEC v. 
Thomas J. Petters, et al,  Litigation Release No. 21687 (Oct. 18, 2010)); SEC v. Donald Anthony 
Walker Young, et al, Civil Action No. 09-1634 (E.D. Penn.)(Apr. 12, 2011); SEC. v. Imperium 
Investment Advisors, LLC, et al, 8:10-CV-02859-JDW-MAP (M.D.F.L) (June30, 2011) (discussed in 
In the Matter of Imperium Investment Advisors, LLC, Administrative Proceeding File No. 3-14471 
(July 20, 2011)). 
213  
Goldstein v. SEC, 451 F.3d 873 (D.C. Cir. 2006).
43  c. 
No Fiduciary Duty.  Rule 206(4)-8 does not create a fiduciary duty to 
investors or potential investors in a pooled investment vehicle not 
otherwise imposed by law, nor does it alter any duty or obligation an 
adviser has under the Advisers Act, or any state law or requirement to 
investors in a pooled vehicle.214  In adopting the rule, the SEC 
explained that rule 206(4)-8 would, however, permit the SEC to 
enforce an adviser’s fiduciary duty created by other law if the adviser 
fails to fulfill that duty by negligently or deliberately failing to make 
the required disclosure.  
d. 
Pooled Investment Vehicles.   Pooled investment vehicles include 
hedge funds, private equity funds, venture capital funds, and other 
types of privately offered pools that invest in securities as well as 
investment companies that are registered with the SEC under the 
Investment Company Act.215 
11. Insider Trading.  Section 204A of the Act requires advisers to establish,
investment companies that are registered with the SEC under the 
Investment Company Act.215 
11. Insider Trading.  Section 204A of the Act requires advisers to establish, 
maintain, and enforce written policies and procedures reasonably designed 
to prevent the misuse of material, non-public information by the adviser or 
any of its associated persons,216 including the misuse of material, non-public 
information about the adviser’s securities recommendations and client 
securities holdings and transactions.217   
12. Brochure Rule.   
a. 
Firm Brochure.  Rule 204-3, as amended in 2010, requires a registered 
adviser to prepare and deliver to clients a plain English, narrative 
brochure that contains all information required by Part 2A of Form 
ADV, including, among other things, the adviser’s business practices, 
investment strategies, fees, conflicts of interest, and disciplinary 
information.218 The adviser must deliver the brochure to a client before
investment strategies, fees, conflicts of interest, and disciplinary 
information.218 The adviser must deliver the brochure to a client before 
or at the time of entering into an advisory contract with the client, and 
must annually deliver to the client an updated brochure which contains 
or is accompanied by a summary of material changes, or a summary of
214  
An adviser to a hedge fund may have a separate relationship with an investor in a hedge fund that it 
advises that gives rise to fiduciary obligations.  U.S. v. Lay, 566 F. Supp. 2d 652 (N.D. Ohio May 13, 
2008). 
215  
Rule 206(4)-8(b) provides that a “pooled investment vehicle” means any investment company as 
defined in section 3(a) of the Investment Company Act or any company that would be an investment 
company under section 3(a) of that Act but for the exclusion provided from that definition by either 
Section 3(c)(1) or section 3(c)(7) of that Act.
216 
The SEC has brought enforcement proceedings against advisers for violating section 204A.  See, e.g., 
In the Matter of Gabelli & Co. Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1457 (Dec. 8, 1994).  
217  
See also, Investment Adviser Code of Ethics, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2256 (July 2, 2004), 
available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/finalarchive/finalarchive2004.shtml (“We … remind 
advisers that they must maintain and enforce policies and procedures to prevent the misuse of material, 
non-public information, which we believe includes misuse of material, non-public information about 
the adviser’s securities recommendations, and client securities holdings and transaction.”). 
218  
As stated in Section V.B.2, the adviser must also file with the SEC the brochure that it delivered to its 
client to satisfy its registration requirements under rules 203-1 and 204-1.
44  material changes with an offer to deliver the updated brochure upon 
request. 219  
(i) 
Non-Required Information.  Delivery of a brochure meeting the 
requirements of Part 2A does not necessarily satisfy an adviser’s 
full disclosure obligation under the anti-fraud rules.220  
Accordingly, many advisers include additional information in 
their brochures. 
(ii) Exceptions to Delivery.  Advisers are not required to deliver a 
brochure to investment company clients or to clients for whom 
they provide only impersonal services for less than $500.221   
(iii) Electronic Delivery.  Advisers may deliver brochures 
electronically with client consent.222  
b. 
Brochure Supplement.  Rule 204-3 also requires the adviser to deliver 
a brochure supplement that contains information about an advisory 
employee, including the employee’s educational background, business 
experience, other business activities, and disciplinary history, to a
employee, including the employee’s educational background, business 
experience, other business activities, and disciplinary history, to a 
client before or at the time the employee begins to provide advisory 
services to that client.223   
(i) 
Covered employees.  An employee must deliver a brochure 
supplement to clients, if the employee formulates investment 
advice for the client and has direct client contact; or makes 
discretionary investment decisions for the client even if the 
employee has no direct client contact.224 
(ii) 
Exceptions to delivery.  Advisers are not required to deliver a 
brochure supplement to a client: (i) to whom the adviser is not 
required to deliver a brochure; (ii) who receives only impersonal 
service; or (iii) who is an officer, employee or other persons 
related to the adviser that would be “qualified client” under rule 
205-3(d)(1).225  
(iii) Electronic Delivery.  Advisers may deliver brochure supplements
219  
Rule 204-3(b)(1) and (2). 
220 
See Part 2 Adopting Release, supra note 113, at n. 7.   
221  
Rule 204-3(c). 
222  
Use of Electronic Media by Broker-Dealers, Transfer Agents, and Investment Advisers for Delivery of 
Information, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1562 (May 9, 1996) (publishing Commission 
interpretive guidance with respect to use of electronic media to fulfill investment advisers’ disclosure 
delivery obligations). 
223  
Rule 204-3(b)(3). 
224  
Id.  Note that if the investment advice is provided by a team comprised of more than 5 employees, only 
the 5 employees that have the most significant responsibility for the day-to-day advice to a client need 
to provide brochure supplements to that client.  For more information, see Part 2 FAQs, supra note 
113. 
225  
Rule 204-3(c)(2).
45  electronically with client consent.  
13. Systemic Risk Reporting on Form PF.  In October 2011, the SEC adopted 
rule 204(b)-1 requiring registered advisers with at least $150 million in 
private fund assets under management to submit regular reports on new 
Form PF.  Advisers must file Form PF electronically on a confidential basis. 
Form PF is designed, among other things, to assist the Financial Stability 
Oversight Council in its assessment of systemic risk in the U.S. financial 
system.226  
a. 
Smaller private fund advisers. Advisers that manage at least $150 
million of private fund assets, but less than the amounts that make 
them “large private fund advisers,” complete only section 1 of Form 
PF.  They file annually within 120 days of the end of their fiscal year.   
Section 1 requires, for each private fund, limited information about the 
size, leverage, investor types, investor concentration, liquidity and fund
Section 1 requires, for each private fund, limited information about the 
size, leverage, investor types, investor concentration, liquidity and fund 
performance.  This section also requires information regarding 
strategy, counterparty exposures, and use of trading and clearing 
mechanisms for each private fund that is a hedge fund. 
b. 
Larger Private Funds Advisers.  Three types of “Large Private Fund 
Advisers” that meet certain thresholds for assets under management 
based on investment strategy type are required to complete additional 
sections of Form PF.227 
(i) 
Large Hedge Fund Advisers.  Advisers managing at least $1.5 
billion in hedge fund assets must file quarterly within 60 days of 
their quarter end and, in addition to Section 1, must complete 
Section 2 of Form PF.   
Section 2a requires information about aggregate hedge fund 
assets the adviser manages, such as the value of investments in 
different types of assets, the duration of fixed income holdings,
Section 2a requires information about aggregate hedge fund 
assets the adviser manages, such as the value of investments in 
different types of assets, the duration of fixed income holdings, 
the value of turnover for certain asset classes and the 
geographical breakdown of investments.  Section 2b requires, for 
each hedge fund that has net assets of at least $500 million, more 
granular information about the fund’s exposures, leverage, risk 
profile and liquidity. 
(ii) Large Private Equity Fund Advisers.  Advisers managing at least 
$2 billion in private equity fund assets must file annually within 
120 days of the end of their fiscal year (same as smaller advisers) 
and, in addition to Section 1, must complete section 4 of Form 
PF.
226  
Reporting by Investment Advisers to Private Funds and Certain Commodity Pool Operators and 
Commodity Trading Advisors on Form PF. Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3308 (Oct. 2011), 
available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2011/ia-3308.pdf (“Form PF Adopting Release”).  The staff 
of the Division of Investment Management has published responses to frequently asked questions on 
Form PF, available at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/pfrd.pfrdfaq.shtml. 
227  
Form PF Adopting Release, supra note 226, at 21.
46  Section 4 requires information about the extent of leverage 
incurred by funds’ portfolio companies, use of bridge financing, 
funds’ investments in financial institutions, and geographical and 
industry breakdowns of funds’ investments in portfolio 
companies. 
(iii) Large Liquidity Fund Advisers.  Advisers managing at least $1 
billion in combined unregistered and registered money market 
fund assets must file quarterly within 15 days of their quarter end 
and, in addition to Section 1, must complete section 3 of Form PF 
Item 3 requires information about each liquidity fund’s portfolio, 
certain information relevant to the risk profile of the fund and the 
extent to which the fund has a policy of complying with all or 
aspects of rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act. 
c. 
Non-US. Advisers.  A registered adviser with a principal office and 
place of business outside the U.S. may omit reporting of any private
aspects of rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act. 
c. 
Non-US. Advisers.  A registered adviser with a principal office and 
place of business outside the U.S. may omit reporting of any private 
fund that, during the preceding fiscal year: (i) was not organized in the 
U.S.; (ii) was not beneficially owned by one or more U.S. persons; and 
(iii) was not offered in the U.S.228 
14. Privacy Rules.  Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act protects the privacy 
interests of consumers of financial services, including clients of SEC-
registered investment advisers.229  SEC rules implementing the statute 
protect only individuals’ personal privacy interests, and not those of 
businesses or individuals who seek to obtain the services of an adviser for 
business purposes.230   
a. 
Notices.  An adviser must provide clients an initial and an annual 
notice of the adviser’s privacy policies.  The initial notice must be 
provided no later than when the client enters into an advisory
notice of the adviser’s privacy policies.  The initial notice must be 
provided no later than when the client enters into an advisory 
contract.231  
Content of Notice.  Notices must be clear and conspicuous, i.e., 
reasonably understandable and designed to call attention to the nature 
and significance of the notice.  They must include, among other things: 
(i) categories of non-public personal information the adviser collects; 
(ii) categories of information the adviser shares; (iii) categories of
228  
General Instruction 1 (last paragraph) to Form PF.  
229  
Title V is not codified as part of the Advisers Act.  It is codified at 15 U.S.C. 6801-6827. 
230  
See rule 248.3(g)(1).  The SEC’s implementing rules can be found at 17 CFR Part 248 (“Regulation 
S-P”).  The rules apply to SEC-registered advisers.  Rule 248.1(b).  Advisers that are unregistered or 
are registered only with the states are subject to privacy regulations overseen by the Consumer 
Financial Products Board.  Regulation S-P was adopted under the Securities Exchange Act, the 
Investment Company Act, and the Advisers Act; therefore the SEC has the remedies available under 
those statutes as applicable in enforcing the privacy rules.  The SEC staff has posted responses to 
frequently asked questions about Regulation S-P at 
www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/guidance/regs2qa.htm. 
231  
Rules 248.4(a), 248.5(a).
47  affiliates and non-affiliates with which the adviser shares the 
information; and (iv) the adviser’s policies and practices for protecting 
the confidentiality and security of information. 
Model Form.  The SEC has adopted a model form that advisers may 
choose to use to satisfy the initial and annual notice disclosure 
requirements.  Use of the form provides advisers with a “safe harbor” 
for the content of the required notice under the privacy rules.232   
b. 
Opt-Out.  An adviser must provide clients with an opportunity to “opt 
out” or block the adviser from sharing “non-public” personal financial 
information with nonaffiliated third parties.233 
Exceptions.  An adviser does not have to provide an opt-out right in 
three circumstances: 
(i) 
the information is provided to an affiliate;234 
(ii) 
the adviser shares the information in the course of providing 
advisory services to the client (e.g., with a broker, transfer agent,
(i) 
the information is provided to an affiliate;234 
(ii) 
the adviser shares the information in the course of providing 
advisory services to the client (e.g., with a broker, transfer agent, 
or lawyer) with the client’s consent, or as required by law;235 or 
(iii) the adviser shares the information with a nonaffiliate that 
performs services, including marketing, for the adviser, but the 
adviser must have entered into a contract with the nonaffiliate 
that prohibits the nonaffiliate from using the information except 
for the purpose for which it received it.236 
c. 
Safeguarding and Properly Disposing of Client Information.237  An
232  
17 CFR 248.2, adopted in, Final Model Privacy Form under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, Investment 
Advisers Act Release No. 2950 (Nov. 16, 2009), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2009/34-
61003.pdf.  
233  
Rule 248.10. 
234  
Subpart B of Regulation S-P governs the use of certain information received by affiliates.  This 
subpart, Regulation S-AM, allows a consumer, in certain limited situations, to block affiliates of 
advisers from soliciting the consumer, if the solicitation is derived from certain private information that 
the adviser has shared with an affiliate.  Subpart B (Regulation S-AM) differs from Subpart A of 
Regulation S-P in that it does not restrict the sharing of certain information, only the actual use of the 
information to solicit.  See Regulation S-AM: Limitations on Affiliate Marketing, Investment Advisers 
Act Release No. 2911 (August, 4, 2009) available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2009/34-
60423.pdf. 
235  
Rules 248.14, 248.15. 
236
Act Release No. 2911 (August, 4, 2009) available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2009/34-
60423.pdf. 
235  
Rules 248.14, 248.15. 
236  
Rule 248.13. 
237  
The SEC has proposed additional amendments to its privacy rules.  In 2012, the SEC proposed rules, 
including those that could require certain advisers who have custody or client assets or that otherwise 
qualify as financial institutions to (i) develop a program to identify “red flags” associated with identity 
theft, and (ii) have policies and procedure designed to prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection 
with its consumer accounts.  Identity Theft Red Flags Rules, Investment Company Act Release No. 
29969 (Feb. 28, 2012) available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/2012/ic-29969.pdf.    In 2008, 
the SEC proposed amendments to its rules, including (i) a requirement that individuals be notified 
under certain circumstances in the event of a breach of security, (ii) additional guidance as to
the SEC proposed amendments to its rules, including (i) a requirement that individuals be notified 
under certain circumstances in the event of a breach of security, (ii) additional guidance as to 
information that must be included in the safeguard and disposal polices, and (iii) a limited exception to 
the notice and opt-out requirements to allow a departing registered representative to take certain client
48  adviser must adopt written procedures reasonably designed to protect 
client records and information and to dispose of consumer report 
information properly.238 
d. 
“Non-public personal information” includes “personally identifiable 
financial information” (a defined term) and any list, description, or 
other grouping of clients derived using “personally identifiable 
financial information” (e.g., a client list):239 
(i) 
“Personally identifiable financial information” includes 
information a client provides an adviser, information that results 
from services the adviser provides to the client, and information 
an adviser otherwise obtains about the client in connection with 
providing advisory services.240 
(ii) 
“Non-public personal information” does not include “publicly 
available information”— i.e., information the adviser reasonably 
believes is lawfully made available to the general public from 
government records, widely distributed media, or disclosures to
available information”— i.e., information the adviser reasonably 
believes is lawfully made available to the general public from 
government records, widely distributed media, or disclosures to 
the general public required by law.241 
15. Form 13F Disclosure.  An SEC-registered investment adviser that exercises 
investment discretion over at least $100 million in “section 13(f) securities” 
must periodically file Form 13F with the SEC.242  This requirement was 
designed “to create a central depository of historical and current data about 
the investment activities of institutional investment managers” to assist 
investors and regulators.243 
“Section 13(f) securities” generally include equity securities that trade on an 
exchange (including the NASDAQ National Market System).244  Form 13F 
must be filed electronically, via the SEC’s Electronic Data Gathering,
information when leaving a firm.  Regulation S-P: Privacy of Consumer Financial Information and 
Safeguarding Personal Information, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2712 (Mar. 4, 2008).   
238  
Rule 248.30(a); 248.30(b).  The SEC has settled an enforcement action against an investment adviser 
that failed to adopt procedures reasonably designed to protect client records and information.  See In 
the Matter of LPL Financial Corporation, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2775 (Sept. 11, 2008). 
239  
Rule 248.3(t)(1).   
240  
Rule 248.3(u)(1). 
241  
Rule 248.3(t)(2). 
242 
Section 13(f) of the Exchange Act; rule 13f-1(a) under the Exchange Act.  See In the Matter of Quattro 
Global Capital, LLC., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2634 (Aug. 15, 2007) (adviser failed to 
File Form 13F); In the Matter of Cabot Money Management Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 
1577 (Aug. 15, 1996).  
243
File Form 13F); In the Matter of Cabot Money Management Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 
1577 (Aug. 15, 1996).  
243  
S. Rep. No. 94-75, 94th Cong., 2d Sess. 82-85 (1975).  Each quarter, the SEC publishes a list of section 
13(f) securities to assist institutional investment managers in the preparation of their Form 13F filings, 
available at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/13flists.htm. 
244  
“Section 13(f) securities” also include certain equity options and warrants, shares of closed-end 
investment companies, and some convertible securities.  Shares of open-end investment companies are 
not “section 13(f) securities.”  Rule 13f-1(c).  The SEC publishes an official list of section 13(f) 
securities, available at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/13flists.htm.
49  Analysis and Retrieval (“EDGAR”) system, within 45 days after the end of 
the March, June, September, and December calendar quarters.  Form 13F 
reports must identify, among other things: (i) the name of the issuer; (ii) the 
number of shares owned; and (iii) the fair market value, as of the end of the 
quarterly filing period, of the reported securities.245   
Non-U.S. Advisers.  Non-US investment advisers must file Form 13F if they 
(i) use any means or instrumentality of United States interstate commerce in 
the course of their business; and (ii) exercise investment discretion over 
$100 million or more in section 13(f) securities.246 
16. Large Trader Reporting.  An investment adviser that qualifies as a “large 
trader” must obtain a large trader identification number from the SEC, file 
and periodically update Form 13H, and disclose to each SEC-registered 
broker-dealer through which it trades its large trader identification number
and periodically update Form 13H, and disclose to each SEC-registered 
broker-dealer through which it trades its large trader identification number 
and all accounts to which that number applies.247  These requirements were 
designed to assist the SEC in both identifying, and obtaining trading 
information on, market participants that conduct a substantial amount of 
trading activity.248  
An adviser is a “large trader” if it exercises investment discretion over one 
or more accounts through which transactions in “national market system 
securities” are effected through one or more registered broker-dealers in 
amounts that, in the aggregate, amount to either: (i) 2 million shares or 
shares with a fair market value of $20 million during a calendar day; or (ii) 
20 million shares or shares with a fair market value of $200 million during a 
calendar month.249 
National market system securities. These securities include listed options
20 million shares or shares with a fair market value of $200 million during a 
calendar month.249 
National market system securities. These securities include listed options 
and equity securities listed on an exchange (including the NASDAQ 
National Market System).250  The scope of securities that fall under this 
definition is narrower than the scope of securities that trigger Form 13F 
filing.251
245 
The Division of Investment Management has published a “FAQ” regarding Form 13F (“13F FAQs”), 
available at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/13ffaq.htm.   
246  
See also 13F FAQs at FAQ #4. 
247  
See Large Trader Reporting, Exchange Act Release No. 34-64976 (July 27, 2011) (“LTR 
Release”).  The Commission adopted rule 13h-1 and related Form 13H, as directed by section 13(h) of 
the Exchange Act, on July 27, 2011.  The rule also requires registered broker-dealers to monitor 
accounts for the purpose of identifying “unidentified large traders,” capture certain information relating 
to all transactions on behalf of large traders and unidentified large traders that are effected directly or 
indirectly by or through them, and make such information available to the Commission through the 
already-established trade-reporting infrastructure, commonly referred to as the “electronic blue sheets.”  
See id.  
248  
Id.  
249  
See id. 
250
already-established trade-reporting infrastructure, commonly referred to as the “electronic blue sheets.”  
See id.  
248  
Id.  
249  
See id. 
250  
See Regulation NMS, rule 600(b)(46), (47) and (82). 
251  
See supra note 244 and accompanying text.
50  To comply, a large trader must file a Form 13H initial filing (via EDGAR) 
generally within 10 days after effecting aggregate transactions equal to or 
greater than the identifying activity level.252  A large trader must then submit 
an annual filing within 45 days after the end of each calendar year, and must 
file an amendment no later than the end of the calendar quarter in which 
information became stale.253   
Non-U.S. Advisers.  Non-U.S. investment advisers that are “large traders 
under the rule” (i.e., trade through SEC-registered broker-dealers) must 
comply with the rule’s filing and disclosure requirements.254   
C. 
Contractual Requirements 
The Act does not require advisory contracts to be written255 and the existence of a 
contract and the interpretation of its terms is generally a matter for state law.  
Section 205 of the Act, however, requires all advisory contracts to include certain
contract and the interpretation of its terms is generally a matter for state law.  
Section 205 of the Act, however, requires all advisory contracts to include certain 
provisions and prohibits the contracts from including other provisions entered into 
by advisers registered with, or required to be registered with, the SEC. 
1. 
Advisory Fees.  Advisers and clients are free to mutually agree to the amount 
of the adviser’s compensation for its services, and the method by which it 
will be paid.256
Performance Fees.  With significant exceptions discussed below, section 
205(a)(1) of the Act prohibits advisers from entering into a contract with a 
client that varies with the adviser’s success in managing the client’s money, 
i.e., a fee based on a share of the capital gains or appreciation of a client’s
252  
The form requires disclosure of, among other things, the large trader’s contact information, its and its 
affiliates companies businesses, the forms it and its securities affiliates file with the Commission, its 
organizational structure and legal form, and a list of broker-dealers with which it maintains accounts.  
See id. 
253  
See LTR Release.  A large trader may avoid updating filings if it obtains “inactive status” through a 
Form 13H filing by not having effected aggregated transactions in excess of the thresholds at any time 
during the previous full calendar year.   See id. 
254  
Where the laws of a foreign jurisdiction prevent a non-U.S. large trader (whether itself a broker-dealer 
or adviser) from disclosing certain personal identifying information of an underlying principal, foreign 
large traders or representatives of foreign large traders may request an exemption from the SEC 
pursuant to section 36 of the Exchange Act and subsection (g) of rule 13h-1. See id.
large traders or representatives of foreign large traders may request an exemption from the SEC 
pursuant to section 36 of the Exchange Act and subsection (g) of rule 13h-1. See id. 
255  
However, section 15(a) of the Investment Company Act requires advisory contracts with investment 
companies to be in writing.   
256  
The SEC staff has taken the position that an investment adviser that charges fees which substantially 
exceed those charged by other investment advisers may violate section 206 of the Act, unless it 
discloses to existing and prospective clients that such a fee is higher than that charged by other advisers 
that provide the same or similar services.  The staff had indicated that it will consider an advisory fee 
greater than 2% of the total assets under management as excessive and would violate section 206 
unless the adviser disclosure is made that the fee is higher than that normally charged in the industry.
unless the adviser disclosure is made that the fee is higher than that normally charged in the industry.  
See Equitable Communications Co., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 26, 1975); Consultant 
Publications, Inc.,  SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Jan. 29, 1975); Financial Counseling Corporation, 
SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 7, 1974); John G. Kinnard & Co., Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter 
(Nov. 30, 1973).
51  funds.257  Congress included this provision in the Act because of its concern 
that a performance fee would encourage undue speculation with clients’ 
investments.   
a. 
Assets Under Management.  The commonly charged fee based on an 
amount of assets under management is specifically excepted.258   
b. 
Fulcrum Fee.   The Act excepts from the performance fee prohibition a 
type of fee known as a “fulcrum fee.”  This is a fee for “big players” 
where the investment advisory contract involves registered investment 
companies or clients with over $1 million of assets.259  The fee must be 
based on the asset value of the funds under management over a 
“specified period” and must increase or decrease proportionately with 
the “investment performance” of funds under management in relation 
to an “appropriate index of securities prices.”260 
c. 
Non-U.S. Clients.  The Act also excepts contracts with persons who are 
not residents of the United States.261  Congress added this exception in
c. 
Non-U.S. Clients.  The Act also excepts contracts with persons who are 
not residents of the United States.261  Congress added this exception in 
1996 in recognition that the common use of performance fee 
arrangements in other countries placed U.S. advisers at a competitive 
disadvantage. 
d. 
Qualified Clients.  Rule 205-3 permits an adviser to enter into a 
performance fee contract with certain “qualified clients.”  A qualified 
client is a: 
(i) 
natural person or company that has at least $1,000,000 under 
management with the adviser immediately after entering into the
257 
Section 205(a)(1).  The SEC staff has taken the position that section 205(a)(1)’s prohibition of 
investment advisory contracts that contain performance fees extends to investment advisory contracts 
that provide for “contingent fees.”  Contingent Advisory Compensation Arrangements, Investment 
Advisers Act Release No. 721 (May 16, 1980).  A contingent fee is “an advisory fee [that] will be 
waived or refunded, in whole or in part, if a client’s account does not meet a specified level of 
performance” or that is contingent on the investment performance of the funds of advisory clients. 
258 
Section 205(b)(1).  
259 
Section 205(b)(2).  The SEC has published a release discussing factors that investment companies 
considering entering into a fulcrum fee should consider.  Investment Advisers Act Release No. 113 
(Apr. 18, 1972). 
260 
Rules 205-1 and 205-2 define the terms in the text.  But see Royce Value Trust, SEC Staff No-Action
(Apr. 18, 1972). 
260 
Rules 205-1 and 205-2 define the terms in the text.  But see Royce Value Trust, SEC Staff No-Action 
Letter (Dec. 22, 1986) (the SEC staff stated it would not object if an advisory agreement contained a 
performance fee that decreased at a greater rate than it increased and provided for no compensation if 
the net asset value per share declined).  The SEC has instituted several enforcement cases against 
advisers who entered into advisory contracts with investment companies that charge performance fees 
that did not comply with section 205(b).  In each case, the adviser charged the fund more that it could 
charge under section 205(b).  In the Matter of Gartmore Mutual Fund Capital Trust, Investment 
Advisers Act Release No. 2548 (Sept. 7, 2006); In the Matter of Putnam Investment Management, 
LLC, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2547 (Sept. 7, 2006); In the Matter of Numeric Investors
Advisers Act Release No. 2548 (Sept. 7, 2006); In the Matter of Putnam Investment Management, 
LLC, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2547 (Sept. 7, 2006); In the Matter of Numeric Investors 
LLC, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2546. (Sept. 7, 2006); In the Matter of Kensington 
Investment Group, Inc., Investment Advisers Act Release No. 2545 (Sept. 7, 2006).   
261 
Section 205(b)(5).
52  contract;262 
(ii) 
natural person or company that the adviser reasonably believes 
has a net worth of more than $2 million at the time the contract is 
entered into,263 or is a “qualified purchaser”;264 or 
(iii) natural person who is an officer, director, trustee, or general 
partner (or a person serving in a similar capacity) of the adviser, 
or an employee who participates in investment decisions of the 
adviser and has done so for at least 12 months.265 
e. 
Qualified Purchaser Funds.  The Act also excepts contracts with 
certain funds not registered under the Investment Company Act 
because they are offered only to certain wealthy or sophisticated 
investors.266  The funds, which include many hedge funds, rely on the 
exception from the definition of “investment company” provided by 
section 3(c)(7) of the Investment Company Act. 
f. 
Other Funds.  Rule 205-3 excepts contracts with other types of funds, 
but only if each equity owner of the company is a qualified client with
section 3(c)(7) of the Investment Company Act. 
f. 
Other Funds.  Rule 205-3 excepts contracts with other types of funds, 
but only if each equity owner of the company is a qualified client with 
whom the adviser could otherwise enter into a performance fee 
contract under the rule.267  This exception is available to (i) public 
investment companies registered under the Investment Company Act 
of 1940, (ii) business development companies, and (iii) private 
investment companies that rely on the exception provided by section
262  
Section 418 of Dodd-Frank Act directed the SEC to periodically adjust for inflation the dollar amount 
threshold for a “qualified client” every five years.  In 2011, SEC issued an order to increase the 
minimum amount of assets under management threshold from $750,000 to $1,000,000.   See Order 
Approving Adjustment for Inflation of the Dollar Amount Tests in Rule 205-3 under the Investment 
Advisers Act of 1940, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3236 (July 12, 2011) (the “Performance 
Fee Order”).  The SEC then amended rule 205-3 to codify the order in the rule. See Investment Adviser 
Performance Compensation, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 3372 (Feb. 15, 2012) (“Release 
3372”). 
263  
The Performance Fee Order increased the dollar amount for the threshold from $1.5 million to $2 
million.  The SEC then amended rule 205-3 to codify the order in the rule and to exclude the value of a
million.  The SEC then amended rule 205-3 to codify the order in the rule and to exclude the value of a 
person’s primary residence and certain property-related debts from the test of whether a person has 
sufficient net worth to be considered a “qualified client.” See Release 3372, supra note 262.  
264  
A “qualified purchaser” is defined in the rule by reference to section 2(a)(51) of the Investment 
Company Act, which generally defines a "qualified purchaser" to include: (i) a natural person who 
owns not less than $5,000,000 in investments; (ii) a trust that meets certain requirements; and (iii) any 
person (including an investment adviser) who in the aggregate owns and invests on a discretionary 
basis not less than $25,000,000 in investments.
265  
Rule 205-3(d)(1)(iii). 
266 
Section 205(b)(4). 

267  
For a discussion of some of the contours of this exception, see Seligman New Technologies Fund II, 
Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 7, 2002).  The adviser itself and any equity owner not charged a 
performance fee need not be qualified clients.  Rule 205-3(b).  In an arrangement involving multiple 
tiers of funds, the analysis of whether a performance fee may be charged must be repeated at each tier.  
Exception to Allow Registered Investment Advisers to Charge Fees Based Upon a Share of Capital 
Gains Upon or Capital Appreciation of a Client’s Account, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1731 
(July  15, 1998).
53  3(c)(1) of the Investment Company Act.268 
Non-U.S. Funds.  The SEC staff has stated that if the fund is organized 
under the laws of a non-U.S. country, only the equity owners that are 
U.S. residents must be qualified clients.269 
2. 
Assignments of Advisory Contracts.  Advisory contracts must contain a 
provision prohibiting their assignment without consent of the client.270  An 
assignment generally includes any direct or indirect transfer of an advisory 
contract by an adviser or any transfer of a controlling block of an adviser’s 
outstanding voting securities.271  A transaction that does not result in a 
change of actual control or management of the adviser (e.g., a corporate 
reorganization) would not be deemed to be an assignment for these 
purposes.272   
3. 
Notification of Partnership Changes.  If the adviser is organized as a 
partnership, each of its advisory contracts must provide that the adviser will 
notify the client of a change in its membership.273 
4.
partnership, each of its advisory contracts must provide that the adviser will 
notify the client of a change in its membership.273 
4. 
Hedge Clauses.  The Act voids any provision of a contract that purports to 
waive compliance with any provision of the Act.274  The SEC staff takes the 
position that an adviser that includes any such provision in a contract 
misleads its clients in violation of the Act’s anti-fraud provisions by creating 
in the mind of the client the belief that a legal right or remedy under the Act 
is not available.275   
Indemnification Clauses.   Historically, the SEC staff has taken the position 
that prohibition would, for example, preclude an adviser from purporting to 
limit its culpability to acts involving gross negligence or willful 
malfeasances,276 even if the hedge clause explicitly provides that rights
268  
Rule 205-3(b) and (d)(3). 
269  
See Lazard Frères Asset Management, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 12, 1996). 
270 
Section 205(a)(2).  
271 
Section 202(a)(1).  
272 
Rule 202(a)(1)-1.  While rule 202(a)(1)-1 was adopted primarily to deal with intra-corporate 
reorganizations and reorganizations resulting from changes in domicile, the Division of Investment 
Management explained in a staff no-action letter that the rule is not so limited.  Zurich Insurance 
Company, Scudder Kemper Investments, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 31, 1998).  Zurich involved 
a complex corporate transaction, the substance of which the Division did not address.  Instead, the 
Division stated that the adviser must itself evaluate whether a particular transaction involves a change 
of actual control or management.   
273 
Section 205(a)(3).  
274 
Section 215(a).  
275  
Opinion of the General Counsel, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 58 (Apr. 10, 1951).  The SEC
of actual control or management.   
273 
Section 205(a)(3).  
274 
Section 215(a).  
275  
Opinion of the General Counsel, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 58 (Apr. 10, 1951).  The SEC 
has instituted enforcement actions against advisers that have utilized hedge clauses in their advisory 
contracts.  In the Matter of William Lee Parks, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 736 (Oct. 27, 
1980); In the Matter of Olympian Financial Services, Inc. Investment Advisers Act Release No. 659 
(Jan 16. 1979). 
276  
Auchincloss & Lawrence Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 8, 1974).
54  under federal or state law cannot be relinquished.277  More recently, the SEC 
staff has stated that whether such an indemnification clause would violate 
the Act’s anti-fraud provisions, turns on “the form and content of the 
particular hedge clause (e.g., its accuracy), any oral or written 
communications between the investment adviser and the client about the 
hedge clause, and the particular circumstances of the client.”278 
5. 
Termination Penalties.  The SEC staff takes the position that certain fees 
that may have the effect of penalizing a client for ending the advisory 
relationship, or that may make the client reluctant to terminate an adviser, 
may be inconsistent with the adviser’s fiduciary duties and may violate 
section 206.279  Thus, the SEC staff interprets the anti-fraud provisions of 
the Act to require an adviser receiving its fee in advance to give a client 
terminating a contract a pro rata refund of pre-paid fees (less reasonable
the Act to require an adviser receiving its fee in advance to give a client 
terminating a contract a pro rata refund of pre-paid fees (less reasonable 
expenses),280 unless the adviser is to receive a pre-determined amount upon 
termination for services already performed, and the client is provided 
adequate disclosure.281  
D. 
Recordkeeping Requirements 
The SEC generally requires a registered adviser to maintain two types of books 
and records:  (i) typical accounting and other records that any business would 
normally keep; and (ii) certain additional records the SEC believes necessary in 
light of the adviser’s fiduciary duties.282 
The requirement to keep records does not turn on the medium in which a 
document is created or maintained.  Thus, electronic documents, including e-
mails, must be maintained if they meet the required record described below. 
1. 
Typical Records 
a. 
All checkbooks, bank statements, and reconciliations. 
b.
mails, must be maintained if they meet the required record described below. 
1. 
Typical Records 
a. 
All checkbooks, bank statements, and reconciliations. 
b. 
All written agreements entered into by the adviser with any client or 
otherwise relating to the business of the adviser, e.g., rental and service 
agreements, mortgages, employment contracts, advisory contracts. 
c. All invoices or statements relating to the adviser’s business.
277  
Omni Management Corp. SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 13, 1975); First National Bank of Akron, 
SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 27. 1976). 
278  
Heitman Capital Management, LLC, et al., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Feb. 12. 2007). 
279  
See, e.g., National Deferred Compensation, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Aug. 31, 1987) (“an adviser 
may not fulfill its fiduciary obligations if it imposes a fee structure penalizing a client for deciding to 
terminate the adviser’s service or if it imposes an additional fee on a client for choosing to change his 
investment”).  
280 
National Regulatory Services, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Dec. 2, 1992).  The staff does not see this 
view altered by the decision Transamerica v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11 (1979), that clients do not have a 
private right of action under section 206 of the Act, because they continue to have rights to sue for 
equitable damages under section 215 of the Act. 
281
private right of action under section 206 of the Act, because they continue to have rights to sue for 
equitable damages under section 215 of the Act. 
281 
BISYS Fund Services, Inc., SEC Staff No-Action Letter (Sept. 2, 1999).  
282  
Rule 204-2.
55  d. 
All cash receipts and disbursement journals, other journals, appropriate 
ledger accounts, all trial balances, financial statements, and internal 
audit working papers relating to the business of the adviser. 
2. 
Additional Records 
a. 
A record of the personal securities transactions of the adviser and its 
employees. 
b. 
Copies of each report of personal securities holdings made by an 
access person under the adviser’s code of ethics. 
c. 
Documents supporting an adviser’s decision to approve an access 
person’s personal securities transactions. 
d. 
A list of all persons who currently are “access persons” and who have 
been access persons within the last five years. 
e. 
A memorandum of each order given by the adviser for the purchase or 
sale of any security and any instruction from the client concerning 
such purchase and sale. 
f. 
A cross reference of securities held by client and by issuer. 
g. 
All written communications received and copies of all written
such purchase and sale. 
f. 
A cross reference of securities held by client and by issuer. 
g. 
All written communications received and copies of all written 
communications sent by the adviser relating to: 
(i) 
any recommendation made or proposed to be made, and any 
advice given or proposed to be given; 
(ii) 
any receipt, disbursement or delivery of funds or securities; or 
(iii) the placing or executing of any order to purchase or sell any 
security. 
h. 
Copies of all circulars, advertisements, newspaper articles, etc., sent to 
10 or more persons. 
i. 
A list of all accounts over which the adviser has discretionary 
authority. 
j. 
Copies of any power of attorney. 
k. 
A copy of each written statement given to any client in compliance 
with the brochure rule and any document prepared in compliance with 
the requirements of Form ADV. 
l. 
Clients’ acknowledgement of receipt of a solicitation agreement. 
m. 
Documents substantiating any performance advertised.283
283  
Rule 204-2(a)(16).  See Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1135 (Aug. 17, 1988) (adopting 
paragraph (a)(16)); see also Salomon Brothers Asset Management Inc. and Salomon Brothers Asset 
Management Asia Pacific Limited, SEC Staff No-Action Letter (July 23, 1999) (explaining that records 
needed to be retained to substantiate performance).  In addition, rule 204-2(e)(3)(ii) provides that 
advisers that had relied on the exemption from registration under section 203(b)(3) of the Act before
56  n. 
Certain additional records if the adviser has custody or possession of 
clients’ cash or securities.284 
o. 
Copies of the code of ethics and amendments thereto. 
p. 
Records of violations of the code by supervised persons and of any 
actions taken against violators of the code of ethics. 
q. 
Copies of each supervised person’s written acknowledgment of receipt 
of a copy of the code of ethics. 
r. 
Certain additional records regarding political contributions and 
advisory services to any government entity.285 
3. 
Other Requirements Regarding Recordkeeping 
a. 
All books and records required to be kept by the rule must be 
maintained and preserved in any easily accessible place for a period of 
no less than five years.286 
b. 
Records required to be kept may be kept in micrographic media (e.g., 
microfilm or microfiche) or in electronic storage media (e.g., optical 
storage discs, CD ROMs).287 
c. 
There are special recordkeeping rules for non-resident investment
microfilm or microfiche) or in electronic storage media (e.g., optical 
storage discs, CD ROMs).287 
c. 
There are special recordkeeping rules for non-resident investment 
advisers.288  
E. 
Applicability to Non-U.S. Advisers.   
The SEC has stated that most of the requirements (discussed above) do not apply 
with respect to the non-U.S. clients of an SEC registered adviser whose principal 
place of business is not in the U.S.289  For example, a non-U.S. adviser is not
July 21, 2011 (the private adviser exemption) will not be subject to the requirement of maintaining 
records to support their calculation of the performance, or rate of return, of the accounts they managed 
or securities they recommended for any period prior to their registration with the SEC, provided that 
they continue to preserve any records in their possession that pertain to such performance or rate of 
return. 
284  
Rule 204-2(a)(17)(iii) and (b). 
285
Rule 204-2(a)(18) and (h). 
286  
Rule 204-2(e).  The first two years, the records must be kept in the offices of the adviser. 
287  
Rule 204-2(g).  An adviser storing records in electronic storage media must establish and maintain 
procedures:  (i) to preserve the records and safeguard them from loss, alteration or destruction; (ii) limit 
access to authorized personnel; and (iii) reasonably assure that any reproduction of paper records onto 
electronic media is accurate.  See In the Matter of Anthony Fields, CPA, et al., Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 3348 (Jan. 4, 2012) (The SEC has instituted administrative proceedings alleging that 
adviser violated section 204 of the Advisers Act and rules 204-2(a)(11) and 204-2(e)(3)(i) thereunder 
by utilizing several email and online communication providers, each of which routinely deletes emails 
and online communications after six months, and doing nothing to retain these communications). 
288  
Rule 204-2(j).   
289
and online communications after six months, and doing nothing to retain these communications). 
288  
Rule 204-2(j).   
289  
Registration Under the Advisers Act of Certain Hedge Fund Advisers, Investment Advisers Act 
Release No. 2266 (July 20, 2004) at §II.C.(3)(c)(this rule was vacated by a federal court in 2006, see 
supra note 213).  See also section 203(b)(3) of the Advisers Act amended by the Dodd-Frank Act,
57  required to maintain non-U.S. person client assets in accordance with the custody 
rule.   
The SEC staff has stated that a non-U.S. adviser registered with the SEC is subject 
to examination by SEC staff and must maintain certain records with respect to all 
of its clients, including non-U.S. clients.290
F. 
Administrative Oversight 
All records of a registered adviser (and not only those required to be created or 
maintained pursuant to SEC rule) are subject to examination by SEC staff.291  
Personnel in the SEC’s Office of Compliance Inspections and Examinations 
located at SEC headquarters and various regional offices usually conduct 
inspections.  All examinations are confidential.292   
1. 
Types of Inspections.   There are generally three types of inspections. 
a. 
Examinations of High-Risk Investment Advisers.  The SEC staff 
utilizes a risk-based process, identifying higher-risk investment 
advisers for examination consideration and focusing examination 
resources on certain higher-risk activities at selected investment 
advisers, including conflicts of interest, portfolio management, 
valuation, performance, advertising and asset verification.  Typically, 
higher-risk investment advisers are identified based on (i) information
valuation, performance, advertising and asset verification.  Typically, 
higher-risk investment advisers are identified based on (i) information 
contained in regulatory filings; (ii) assessments made during past 
examinations; and/or (iii) other criteria and available information.293
Release 3222, supra note 68 and Section III. B. 3 of this outline for discussion regarding foreign 
private adviser exemption.  
290  
The SEC staff has provided guidance in a series of no-action letters regarding the recordkeeping 
obligations of registered advisers that are located offshore. Under that analysis, the registered adviser 
must, in order to rely on the no-action relief, comply with the Act’s recordkeeping rules, other than (i) 
rules 204-2(a)(3) and (7) with respect to transactions involving offshore clients that do not relate to 
advisory services performed by the registered adviser on behalf of United States clients or related 
securities transactions; and (ii) rules 204-2(a)(8), (9), (10), (11), (14), (15) and (16) and 204-2(b) with 
respect to transactions involving, or representations or disclosures made to, offshore clients.  See, e.g., 
Royal Bank of Canada, SEC Staff No-Action Letter, (June 3, 1998).  The Dodd-Frank Act added
Royal Bank of Canada, SEC Staff No-Action Letter, (June 3, 1998).  The Dodd-Frank Act added 
section 214(b) to the Advisers Act, which provides extraterritorial jurisdiction to U.S. federal courts 
regarding actions or proceedings brought by the Commission or the United States for violation of 
section 206 of the Act involving (i) conduct within the United States even if the violation is committed 
by a foreign adviser and involves only foreign investors; or (ii) conduct occurring outside the United 
States that has a foreseeable substantial effect within the United States. 
291  
See section 204 (“All records (as so defined) of such investment advisers are subject at any time, or 
from time to time, to such reasonable periodic, special, or other examinations.” (emphasis added)). 
292  
Section 210(b) of the Act generally prohibits the SEC or the SEC staff from disclosing publicly either
292  
Section 210(b) of the Act generally prohibits the SEC or the SEC staff from disclosing publicly either 
the existence of an examination or investigation conducted under the Act, or the results of or any facts 
ascertained during an examination or investigation. 
293  
See Study on Enhancing Investment Adviser Examinations (Jan. 19, 2011), available at 
http://sec.gov/news/studies/2011/914studyfinal.pdf (staff study required by section 914 of the Dodd-
Frank Act, which directed the Commission to review and analyze the need for enhanced examination 
and enforcement resources for investment advisers); Commissioner Elisse B. Walter, Statement on 
Study Enhancing Investment Adviser Examinations (Required by Section 914 of Title IV of the Dodd-
58  b. 
Special Purpose Reviews.  The SEC staff conducts risk-targeted 
examination sweeps regarding specific areas of concern within the 
financial services industry covering a broad sample of regulated 
entities regarding those areas.  These sweeps are typically limited in 
scope.  In addition, the SEC staff conducts limited scope examinations 
of an investment adviser’s general business activities and a targeted set 
of the adviser’s books and records to help OCIE better assess the risk 
profile of an investment adviser.294 
c. 
Cause Examinations.  These may be based on receipt of a complaint 
from a client or a competitor, press reports of problems, rumors, or 
anonymous tips.  
In addition, OCIE launched a presence exams initiative in 2012 to conduct 
focused, risk-based examinations of investment advisers to private funds that 
registered with the Commission following the repeal of the private adviser
focused, risk-based examinations of investment advisers to private funds that 
registered with the Commission following the repeal of the private adviser 
exemption.295  The presence exams include three phases:  (i) an initial phase 
of industry outreach and education; (ii) followed by a coordinated series of 
examinations of a significant percentage of newly registered advisers 
focusing on the highest risk areas of their businesses; and (iii) culminating in 
the publication of a series of “after action” reports, reporting to the industry 
on the broad issues, risks and themes identified during the course of the 
examinations.296 
2. 
Focus of Inspections.  Examiners will generally focus on the various 
activities at an investment adviser deemed by the staff to be high risk.  
Among other things, the staff is seeking to detect violations of the federal 
securities laws, including the requirement that the adviser have effective
Among other things, the staff is seeking to detect violations of the federal 
securities laws, including the requirement that the adviser have effective 
compliance policies and procedures.  When the SEC adopts new rules that 
are applicable to investment advisers, examiners may inquire about the areas 
affected by such rules and review relevant documentation to assess how the 
adviser is complying with the new requirements.  Other examination focus 
areas are determined by the purpose for conducting the exam, business 
activities of the investment adviser, and the compliance controls surrounding 
those activities.297 
3. 
Results of Inspection.  Generally, there are three possible results from an 
examination. 
a. 
The SEC staff finds no problems and sends the adviser a letter stating 
that the inspection is finished (a rare event!).
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act) (Jan. 19, 2011), available at 
http://sec.gov/news/speech/2011/spch011911ebw.pdf.   
294  
Id.  
295  
See Letter to Newly Registered Investment Advisers from Drew Bowden, Deputy Director, Office of 
Compliance Inspections and Examinations, SEC (Oct. 9, 2012), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/about/offices/ocie/letter-presence-exams.pdf.  
296  
See Norm Champ, “What SEC Registration Means for Hedge Fund Advisers” (May 11, 2012), 
available at http://sec.gov/news/speech/2012/spch051112nc.htm. 
297  
See Study on Enhancing Investment Adviser Examinations, supra note 293.
59  b. 
The SEC staff sends an “exam summary letter,” which informs the 
adviser of any violations or possible violations found and requests the 
adviser promptly to take any necessary corrective steps and submit a 
written response to the SEC staff of the corrective actions taken. 
c. 
The SEC staff refers the inspection to the SEC’s Division of 
Enforcement for further consideration and possible commencement of 
an enforcement proceeding—not common as a first step.
